---
authors: Doishy
banner: Duress | STA | 92
kind: REPORT
tags: [LEGACY, MEANDECK]
title: "Legacy at Axion's Mega Weekend: Winner's Report and Metagame Discussion"
---

## Table of Contents

## Preface

On the weekend just gone (5th and 6th of February 2022)
[Axion](https://www.axionnow.com/) hosted their first CompREL Mega Weekend since
the whole COVID thing started. This included a massive Modern event, a unified
Modern trios event and of course, one of their infamous *Legacy for Goodies*
events too. As Fran&ccedil;ois (the lovely owner) said during the player's
meeting, they were worried they would just about fill the seats for the 32
player capped Legacy event however what actually happened was it sold out within
a day almost! The people have spoken, they want Legacy and it sounds like more
events from Axion will be appearing within the year!

It was an amazing event run with lots of lovely people involved with judging
(big thanks to Nik, our head judge), scorekeeping (big shout out to Will who
also provided us with delicious decklists and metagame data) and of course
playing! It was great to see people just having fun, jamming some cards and
enjoying themselves. There were only two drops from players in round 4 but other
than that, everyone played the entire swiss which goes to show just how much
people just wanted to play!

The event was 32 players. 5 round swiss with a cut to top 4. There were also two
*bonus top 4s* for 5th to 8th place and 9th to 12th place respectively. The
entire top 4 prized and the winners of the bonus top 4s also won some goodies.
First place was a Revised Underground Sea, second a Revised Taiga and various
other delicious staples for 3rd/4th and the bonus top 4 winners.

## The Metagame

*Again a massive thanks to scorekeeper Will for getting us this data.*

Going into the event there were two decks I expected to see represented heavily
but beyond that I had no idea on what the meta could be. I expected a heavy UR
Delver presence and a heavy Death & Taxes showing and looks like I was right
about those.

Without further ado, here is the complete meta breakdown:

| Deck                 | # |
|----------------------|---|
| Yorion Death & Taxes | 4 |
| UR Delver            | 3 |
| Lands                | 3 |
| 4C Control (UWGb)    | 2 |
| Cloudpost            | 2 |
| Doomsday             | 1 |
| UW Delverblade       | 1 |
| Imperial Painter     | 1 |
| 4C Yorion Aluren     | 1 |
| Bant Stoneblade      | 1 |
| Reanimator           | 1 |
| Moon Stompy          | 1 |
| Jeskai Breacher      | 1 |
| Goblins              | 1 |
| UB Shadow            | 1 |
| BUG Control          | 1 |
| Aggro Affinity       | 1 |
| Storm                | 1 |
| Burn                 | 1 |
| Stiflenaught         | 1 |
| Eldrazi Aggro        | 1 |
| Esper Miracles       | 1 |
| 8-Cast               | 1 |

Death & Taxes was the highest represented archetype followed by UR Delver and
then Lands. The meta diversity was huge which was great to see with 23 unique
archetypes on display. Obviously in a small paper event it's hard to draw any
major conclusions other than people played what they could/what they enjoy but
it was nice to see so many different decks on display.

What we can see is that Graveyard based decks were very underrepresented with
only one pilot taking a stand. It's often tough to work out whether people are
in the peaks of overloading with anti-Graveyard hate or troughs of skimping out
on it but with :card[Endurance] in abundance alongside a large number of
potential Force effects and :card[Bojuka Bogs] it likely is tricky to find the
wins without going full throttle with something like Oops All Spells. Tempo,
Prison and Blue Control were all equally represented in the top macro archetype
slots with 6 pilots each followed by Midrange at 5 pilots, Aggro at 4 and both
Spell and Creature combo decks at 2 each.

As metagames go, this one does look like it could actually be quite hostile to
Delver/Tempo style lists given how much Yorion Death & Taxes, Cloudpost and
Lands there was (all heralded to be able to prey on traditional Delver decks)
however despite this there were still two pilots who made it into the top 4. It
also looks like it would be a good meta for decks that prey on some of the
fairer strategies. Something like Elves would have likely been a decent choice
for the event.

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Thalia, Guardian of Thraben
- Delver of Secrets
- Cloudpost
- Exploration
:::

At the end of the day the final results looked like so:

Top 8 (split into two top 4 results):

1. Doomsday - Me!
1. UW Delverblade - Chris S
1. UR Delver - David S
1. Imperial Painter - Callum S
1. Yorion Aluren (4C) - Francis GR
1. Bant Stoneblade - Giuseppe S
1. Yorion Death & Taxes - James M
1. 8-Cast - Andrew P

Then the winner of the 2nd bonus top 4 was: Yorion Death & Taxes - Jamie H. A
great showing all round.

Righty, now for the Doomsday bit :3

## Decklist

I was one of the lucky few who managed to secure a ticket and with only the
knowledge that "there will probably be UR Delver and Death & Taxes" about I had
to try and come up with my list. To make things slightly trickier I had gone 1-3
at the last local FNM I had played in (making me feel a little bummed out) and,
probably more importantly, the :card[Ragavan, Nimbler Pilferer] ban had come
into effect so I was probably due to make some changes to my [previous
list](/articles/2022/01/22/zero-respect#the-decklist) whilst being unable to
test for the event at all thanks to general life things getting in the way.

::decklist{path=2022/02/zero-respect}

As a result I took my previous list as a starter and begun conversing online
with various community members to try and assess what changes I might want to
make (shout out to Otterlady, Nevilshute and Prepare4Robots especially on this).
I knew I wanted to add additional discard effects into the list somewhere and
was most worried about Blue based *Soup* decks (Bant, 4C, Jeskai Breacher) just
because they can run such a diverse spread of relevant hate that, in normal
lists, requires answers that are otherwise really bad in those matchups. I spent
a lot of time agonising over trying an alternative way to bypass a :card[Torpor
Orb] from say a RUG Saga deck such as good old :card[Tendrils of Agony] or ways
to remove a variety of other nuisance elements like :card[Meddling Mage] as well
with tools like :card[Kolaghan's Command] however it was decided to just keep to
the theme of what I know and just not respect that sort of behaviour. If blue
decks want to bring such rude toys to play then they are welcome to it!

The final major talking point which I was convinced to try was removing
:card[DA] from the list. A lot of people have started to run the deck still with
:card[Con] but without Analysis as the former still has [relevant pile
application](/meandeck/brainstorm#brainstorm-pile---brainstorm-and-free-cantrip-available)
and acts as a decent cantrip to clear 2 cards in the face of a :card[Narset,
Parter of Veils] whilst the latter only enables specific fast/efficient piles
but ones that are very susceptible to a lot of hate in the format. Thanks to
recent trends and discussion with folks I decided to risk it by removing the
card from the deck entirely (it was discussed putting it in the board but it
shines most of all in game 1 scenarios).

When Consider was first spoilt I had in fact said the following:

> I'm going to buy Consider. Buy DA. Then probably only end up on one consider
> no DA >.<
>
> &mdash; Doishy 2021/06/08

Looks like it took me a fair while to stick to what I had said initially but I
guess past me knew what they were talking about and the change seemed to work
out well.

As a result then we made the following changes to the deck thus going into
*Turbo Zero Respect v0.6*.

Maindeck:

- -1 Deep Analysis
- +1 Thoughtseize

Sideboard:

- -1 Flusterstorm
- +1 Duress

That's it.

That's all I did. ([I had mentioned I am slow to
change](/articles/2022/01/22/zero-respect#i-am-slow-to-make-changes-to-my-deck)).

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- DA
- Tsz
- Flusterstorm
- Duress
:::

The :card[Flusterstorm] change was because I wanted to fit more discard in which
could snipe something like Torpor Orb and dealt with opposing Fluster's too
whilst also being more mana efficient in the long run vs things like Delver. It
also is very strong against opposing spell based combo allowing you to keep a
diverse suite of interaction. I had scoured MTGGoldfish for what sort of
interaction the *Soup* decks were packing and it looked like :card[VoS] was at
an all time low so I figured this is the time when discard is going to look its
best before people remember about that card again now that Monkey is gone! The
other potential cut was the 4th :card[FoN] but I decided on the fluster as, if
nothing else, I would have a hard time trying not to bring in too much
interaction vs certain decks like Bant where Fluster, REBs, Discard and some of
the removal are all potential choices.

## Main Report

So I'm just going to say this now for the record, I was feeling awful the day of
the event. We had driven up the day before and stayed with some friends (and had
a lovely time) however the friends in question were in the process of moving and
so only had an air mattress to offer for sleeping arrangements. This is normally
not an issue however for whatever reason I just could not sleep at all that
night. As a result come Sunday morning when it was time to get up to head to the
event centre, I felt like literal death. I wolfed down a "not
quite-hot-crossed-bun" and headed to the bus stop to get to hotel looking and
feeling hungover as all hell (despite not having imbibed anything boozy the
night before).

Anyways I was there to play and was determined to have fun so having met up with
some of the rest of the Bristol crew, who were playing in the Unified Modern
Trios event, and saying hello to our local judges, I headed to the player
meeting. Fran&ccedil;ois gave a lovely speech and hinted at some *Giga* events
in the future which will be including Legacy in some form. Nik gave his official
speech bit and we kicked off into round 1.

### Round 1 vs. Connor on Yorion Death & Taxes

We shuffle up and I lose the coin toss. Connor reveals a Yorion which
immediately let's me work out he is likely on Death & Taxes or some sort of Blue
Soup deck. I keep a 7 which has the potential for a turn 1 Doomsday. Connor goes
:card[Plains] into :card[Aether Vial] and that pretty much lets me know the
coast is clear. Annoyingly I could have had a turn 1 kill had I kept Deep
Analysis in but instead I just do a clean pass-the-turn pile using Consider for
a fast game 1.

Boarding is pretty simple for DnT, Massacre and Chain come in along with FoNs
for :card[Deafening Silence]. Discard, :card[CoS] and some :card[SW]/:card[Pre]
come out.

Game 2 showed the first of many misplays in the day that I blame the fatigue
for. I keep 5 cards, another turn 1 Doomsday with Force protection but no land
(:card[DR] off of :card[LP]). Opponent once again tries to run out a Vial and I
Force it pitching Force. This was a massive mistake. I should've worked out the
timings of how many turns I would need to pass and what could beat me in passing
that many turns. I would need to pass 3 turns post Doomsday (unless I get lucky
on my draw step with a land or another Petal,:card[BS], Street Wraith or
:card[LED]) and so I should've worked out what beats the likely pile of {fetch,
fetch, TO, :card[Island], :card[Underground Sea]} or even what beats me trying
to go for a faster 2 turn pass pile that maybe uses Brainstorm or something else
similar. Basically there is not enough pressure that can come down from 2 lands
and Vial for passing 3 turns assuming you hold Force for the first thing they
cast. The Forcing of Vial was a poor decision and I should've just held it back
for a turn 2 play.

:::row{variant=PILE}
- Flooded Strand
- Misty Rainforest
- TO
- Island
- Underground Sea
:::

So I draw a dud for turn and jam Doomsday building exactly what was described
above and pass the turn. I was justifiably punished by Connor jamming a turn 2
:card[Stoneforge Mystic] which promptly finds :card[Kaldra Compleat] and simple
as that I was dead. I play land and say go, he puts Kaldra in and hits for 5.
Land go. Hit for 5 and dead.

We learn from out mistakes and move on. Game 3 I keep 7, Connor 5 and I once
again jam a turn 1 Doomsday. With a full grip and on the play there are very few
scenarios where a Death & Taxes player can win from here and we get our first
(somewhat sloppy) win of the day.

**Match**: 2-1  
**Matches**: 1-0  
**Games**: 2-1

### Round 2 vs. Jons on Lands ft. Enlightened Tutor

I manage to win the dice roll here and we both keep 7. I have the potential for
a Doomsday on turn 2 thanks to Petal so I just play fetch and pass. Jons draws
and drops an :card[Urza's Saga] followed by a :card[Mox Diamond] pitching a
:card[Wasteland] and says go. This is almost certainly lands in my head so I jam
Doomsday turn 2 and build a pass-the-turn pile that can survive some mix of
Wasteland and Endurance. I pass and at the end of turn the spice appears. Jons
casts :card[Enlightened Tutor] which grabs a :card[Sphere of Resistance]. This
is something I can ignore and I just play lands and pass finally jamming a
:card[PoN] protected :card[TO] with no issue.

Boarding is similar to Death & Taxes. Chain and FoNs come in. Discard and
Wraiths/Preordains come out. Cavern stays in because Lands often plays REB
effects and it's basically free to keep in.

We both keep 6 and I have a turn 2 Doomsday. I build a pile to beat Endurance,
REB and Torpor Orb figuring it would be present in the side of a deck that runs
E-Tutor. What I fail to do is build a pile that beats :card[Ghost Quarter] and
double Wasteland thanks to :card[Elvish Reclaimer] and I get cut off the {U}{U}
for Oracle. Oof.

Game 3 we both keep 7. I can't remember too much but I think play fetches for
turns 1 and 2. A :card[Null Rod] is jammed by Jons turn 2 so I Brainstorm in
response. The reasoning here was I only had 2 mana sources and a Doomsday in
hand. If I find a land or Ritual I can just let Rod resolve. If I find a Petal
then I Force it and just try to rush things faster. I find no land but I do find
Petal so I force it and jam a turn 3 Doomsday. This time I successfully build
around the hate faced and land a Cavern fueled Oracle with no issue.

**Match**: 2-1  
**Matches**: 2-0  
**Games**: 4-2

Up to this point I had been running on fumes and a little pick-me-up in the form
of half a can of energy drink from my friend Ben was very much needed. I assumed
I had been winning mostly on decent starting hands and decent matchups but
eventually this nice ride was bound to end.

### Round 3 vs. David on UR Delver

I win the die roll again and keep a decent seven that allows a turn 1 Doomsday
with Thoughtseize backup. I drop Sea and Thoughtseize seeing :card[Brazen
Borrower], :card[Dragon's Rage Channeler], :card[FoW], :card[Unholy Heat],
:card[Lightning Bolt] and 2 lands. "Oh boy, it's Delver time". So we take Force,
jam our turn 1 Doomsday, build a classic *anti-Delver* pile of :card[EoA],
Fetch, TO, Cavern, Island. This, or some variation of it works really well
against all but the super fast aggro hands Delver can get with 3 power creatures
and multiple Bolts. David fails to find what he needs and my pile completes.

:::row{variant=PILE}
- Scalding Tarn
- EoA
- TO
- CoS
- Island
:::

Boarding for Delver is now Ragavan free (woo!) but I decided to still bring in
the second Oracle to enable yolo slamming or multiple slam piles to just try and
get those fast wins in. 2 Wraiths and a Thoughtseize come out. Duress, Fluster
and Oracle come in. I might try not bringing in Fluster and keeping 4 discard in
the future also maybe leaving the second Oracle in. We'll play around a bit.

Game 2 is the most *non-gamey* of the day with me having to mull to 5 with a
Doomsday. My next two draws are Doomsdays and between poor draws, Delver
pressure and Wasteland I don't really get to do anything of note.

Game 3 I keep an alright 6 and go for a Thoughtseize. This proves crucial as I
see a hand of Delver, Surgical, Island, Tarn, 2 :card[Murktide Regent] and
Ponder. This hand is really anemic and I take Delver buying me a lot of life in
the medium term. I find what I need and jam turn 3 doing a similar trick to game
1 and with no pressure from David I can just land-go to victory.

Phew. Okay, well we managed to beat the tricky deck somehow. I tried to have a
semi nap at a table on my bag. Alas did not help Q.Q

**Match**: 2-1  
**Matches**: 3-0  
**Games**: 6-3

### Round 4 vs. James on Yorion Death & Taxes

The James mirror. I was not prepared for such things! We have a giggle over the
concepts of an old-school templated first-name-nemesis style card and then
actually go to play.

Game 1 I keep a decent but maybe slow-ish hand and am able to lay down a turn 3
pass-the-turn pile. I actually forget my pile order at one point which means
when I try to go for it in a turn I am left with a card too many in deck so I
have to pass an extra turn (rather than risk :card[Swords to Plowshares] or
:card[Solitude] and thankfully do not get punished for it. (Another instance of
sloppy play Q.Q)

Same boarding as round 1.

Game 2 is brilliant. Game 2 involves a classic *Doishy* hand. The sort of hand
that my friend Matt always tells me I shouldn't go for. The sort of hand where I
just can't help myself and too often get away with. This is my opening 7 (on the
draw mind).

:::row{variant=hand}
- DR | MMQ
- DD
- FoW
- Massacre
- BS
- TO
- Daze
:::

Honestly this hand is perfect. It has multiple interaction spells which stay
relevant and can cast Doomsday from turn 1. Only a small little issue of no
initial mana source. It's fine, we have 18 in the deck that allow us to
Doomsday, 13 of which let us hold :card[Daze] up. The final one, Island, let's
us use Daze and cast our Brainstorm to find the {B} source we need. Thanks to
Force and Massacre we also have huge insurance against potentially multiple
threats and thus can even justify passing 3-4 turns with no issue. Let's just
say for argument's sake there is a god and they were angry at how little respect
I was giving. I think I had 7 looks (6 draws steps and a Street Wraith cycle) to
find what I needed which, out of 53 cards left in deck is a 95.6% chance
according to the hypergeometric calculator I just shoved some numbers into.

*Editors Note: you also get 7 looks if you just mulligan lmao - d8dk32*

Ah well, that's the risk of those keeps. And it was a sweet hand. Even on turn 4
facing double :card[Spirit of the Labyrinth] I felt favoured. It was only when
two Urza tokens joined the party that my life dropped too swiftly to be able to
come back. I have no idea what my opponent must have thought at me passing and
discarding until I died but it must have been funny things.

Game 3 is back to normal business. I cast a turn 1 Doomsday with a double Petal
hand and win after passing a few turns. And with that we head towards the final
swiss round.

**Match**: 2-1  
**Matches**: 4-0  
**Games**: 8-4

Now I am rubbish at breaker maths. I'm not sure what it is but something about
it just fails to penetrate into my thick skull so, looking at the current round
3 standings I ask Ben how safe it is to ID. Ben is wonderful and explains that
there are 4 sets of 3-0 players going into round 4 and so in theory, if no
awkward draws cause pair downs then so long as I match up against another 4-0
player I am safe to ID into the top 4. "Sweet" I think as I had not really eaten
yet and could really use a long break for food or a nap.

### Round 5 vs. Chris on Hot Chicken, some Chocolate and a Nice Chat

I don't know what occurred in round 4 other than a lot of upsets and at checking
the standings Chris and I can see we are the only 2 players at 4-0. He offers
the ID which I gratefully accept. We have a lovely wander to the shop, get some
food, have a sit down and a chat. It was all very pleasant. As it comes to the
round end I have a nosy at the other top table folks to try and work out what
will likely break through. Top contenders seem to be a Yorion Aluren deck and
potentially my round 4 opponent.

**Match**: 1-1-1  
**Matches**: 4-0-1  
**Games**: 8-4

The top 4 cut is actually pretty neat and not what I expected. Obviously Chris
and I take the top two spots (Chris ahead on GW% which I could have improved by
not playing so badly >.< ). Instead of a nice durdly control deck or another
Death & Taxes opponent to munch on, I am greeted by the 3rd and 4th swiss places
being taken by none other than my round 3 opponent David (so UR Delver again)
and Mr Callum Smith of Everyday Eternal fame on Imperial Painter, a matchup that
can be very tough to navigate. I was in no good mindset to be able to pile
around :card[Grindstone] repeatedly so was really not looking forward to that.
To make matters worse Chris, the delightful person I had eaten and conversed
with, betrayed me by being on a UW Delver Blade deck! With two tempo decks and a
headache as my potential opponents I was not looking forward to what was about
to happen.

I was however already more than satisfied with my performance despite the
mistakes and given how tired I still felt (though more alive thanks to foods) I
think I was happy to be winning or losing at this point. In fact losing seemed
like a great idea to just allow me to go to bed quicker but I am stubborn and
competetive so we endured. And, going into the semi-final we meet once again
with David.

### Semi-Final vs. David on UR Delver

We reunite and have a giggle about how tired I still am. Being the higher seed I
take the play (which was massive here) and we both keep 7. I turn 1 :card[PT]
for Doomsday. I think David played a Ponder and passed. Or maybe just went land,
go. I think it was Ponder because of what occurred later. Anyways turn 2 comes
and I drop a second land and cast Dark Ritual. I Thoughtseize him, he thinks a
bit and goes to Daze it (with no mana floating hence why I think he played
Ponder turn 1). I pay for Daze with one of the remaining {B}{B} allowing
Thoughtseize to resolve and see Murktide, Island, Volc, Daze, Pyroblast
(maindeck!) and :card[Expressive Iteration]. I take Daze and proceed to cast a
second Ritual and Doomsday. Exactly the same pile as game 1 of our previous
match, he can't get the pressure down in time to beat Oracle off of Island +
Cavern.

Same boarding as round 3.

Game 2 was tough but closer than I would have thought. My notes are poor but I
definitely throw some discard at him early seeing FoN, REB, 2 x Murktide, and
Misty. I get pressured quite fast finally managing to resolve Doomsday at a
precarious 6 life facing an inactive Channeler, the world's dinkiest Murktide
and maybe 3 cards in David's hand. My pile had to be as simple as it could be
and was just the classic :card[IU] into Edge, Oracle, Cavern, Petal because I
could not play around anything as I went to 1 life on the swing back. I was only
dead to Bolt, Force of Will, Force of Negation, Pyroblast, Red-Elemental Blast,
Daze, Stifle, Null Rod, Torpor Orb, Narset, enough cantrips to set Channeler to
a 3/3 or Wasteland so I felt pretty confident in winning. He draws, plays a
fetch, maybe cantrips, attacks. Okay, we dodged a lot of that list, go to 1,
feeling okay. Then disaster strikes as post-combat he casts :card[Surgical
Extraction] on our Doomsday. Shit, the one out I didn't consider! What was worth
noting was my hand at this point was a Daze and a very sad Pact of Negation (so
maybe I was more protected than I let on, but only a little).

Anyways we were still in the game with a 25%-ish chance to get there with Ideas
or Edge into Ideas but alas we were greeted in our draw step by our dear old
fishy friend. Ah well, close game for sure!

Game 3 I am starting to shake somewhat. Now I don't usually intake caffeine at
all and that energy drink from earlier was starting to either kick in heavily or
wind down. Either way I was not in a good state and just wanted the match done
with fast. (Only because of me though, I was otherwise having a wonderful time
with David who was a very fun opponent!). My 7 was a reasonable hand with
cantrips and some interaction so I shipped it away because it failed to cast
Doomsday on turn 1. My 6 cast Doomsday on turn 1 so I kept it. It even had a
Daze as a nice little extra. I drop double Petal, Sea and cast Doomsday and it
just resolves.... Not what I was expecting. Anyways I pile something sensible.
Clutch the Daze for any hated shenanigans and find myself watching as David's
outs slowly trickled to 0. Again Island and Cavern do their job and despite a
Surgical again on Doomsday this time the pile is resilient as all hell.

Somehow my sorry being had made it to the finals which was crazy (and slightly
upsetting as I did really want to go home). David was an amazing opponent as I
said and he showed me a hand full of interaction like Daze, REBs etc which was
perfect against me except for a *yolo* style all in on turn 1 start when on the
draw. I look forward to playing him again!

**Match**: 2-1  
**Matches**: 5-0-1  
**Games**: 10-5

I groggily look over to my right to see Chris welcoming me across. It seems
Callum was unable to face off against the UW Tempo deck and thus I finally meet
my round 5 opponent on the field of battle.

### Final vs. Chris on UW Delverblade

As Chris took the higher seeding I am on the draw and not feeling good about
that fact. I hadn't seen much of Chris's deck but knew it had Delvers,
Stoneforges, Wasteland and Dazes in. The big factor that makes it less scary is
a lack of Lightning Bolt. The reduced pressure is huge in being able to leverage
time to our advantage. We both keep 7 and he drops a turn 2 Stoneforge which
grabs Kaldra. My turn 2 I cast a Ritual into a Duress which see Daze, Kaldra,
:card[True-Name Nemesis] and Brainstorm as the only spells. I take Daze and slam
a second Ritual into Doomsday with the remaining cards in hand being Brainstorm,
Daze and maybe a Personal Tutor.

Those of you in the know get what just happened. As my opponent has no
interaction going I open sequence a [standard Brainstorm
pile](/meandeck/brainstorm#brainstorm-pile---brainstorm-available). I'm so
jittery and excited yet internally a wreck I start rushing and Nik who is of
course observing the match closely reminds me that it is not timed and I can
slow down. I take a breather and make sure to triple check my pile before
committing (it would be super embarrassing for an author of the Wiki to fuck up
the exact thing he authored on). I demonstrate the entire thing step by step to
Chris (and Nik who was very intrigued) and thus complete my one and only same
turn win of the event.

Sideboarding was a scary prospect. What {U}{W} lacks in terms of pressure in
game 1 it can make up for in potential toolbox cards in games 2 and 3. Torpor
Orb, Meddling Mage and :card[Ethersword Canonist] all came to mind and so I
boarded thinking these elements likely. As I was against a tempo deck I didn't
really want to stress my mana out so I decided to ignore the {R} splash for now.
Additional Duress came in, I think Chain and Massacre both came in too. Probably
some Street Wraiths came out along with a Preordain. My mind is a blur around
this time. Oh yes, second Oracle comes in as well!

Game 2 I just can't get the pieces together in time. Chris manages to deploy
double :card[Esper Sentinel] which do some real heavy lifting in terms of
momentum meaning I find myself facing lethal on board if I cast Doomsday or not.
As a result I fire off a last chance Duress for some info gathering and I think
Chris senses this so Dazes it, I Daze back to which he Forces, I Force and he
has to reveal a Hullbreacher in hand. Good to know I think as I scoop it up. I
think Nik had a chuckle over the epic fight for information before concession.

Game 3 I elected to make no changes to my configuration. There is some back and
forth where I manage to discard a Force from his hand and Daze a Teferi on his
turn 3. I then slam a Doomsday on turn 3 as it's not getting any better and I
have mana to pay for Daze which hits. It resolves facing down some light
pressure. I build something simple but resilient enough that even if I have to
pass twice I have a shot, even facing a known Wasteland.

:::row{variant=PILE}
- IU
- EoA
- TO
- CoS
- TO
:::

The second TO comes in clutch here as, if I get Wastelanded (3 Seas in play) I
can still cast Ideas, drop Cavern and pray for one more turn with Cavern
surviving and even if it doesn't survive Chris would still need to find another
piece of interaction to join it. If by some chance I don't get hit by the known
Wasteland then I can cast Ideas and try to resolve the first Oracle off of
Cavern. If that fails then I get to pass and cast again or pass and draw Edge to
Cycle into the first Oracle with 2 cards left. This does die to Meddling Mage of
course but at this point I was happy to just keep it simple and go for the all
in or die strategy. I pass back to Chris who takes a draw, does some maths, hits
me from 9 to 6 and plays Wasteland (i cry) to then tap out for a True-Name
(hope?!) and states "Right, you either win this turn or are dead on board" (i
cry again but this time from happy tears).

Hands shaking once more I simply reply to the effect of "I'll try" and draw
Ideas Unbound. I cast it, it resolves. I play Cavern, name Wizard (always
Wizard, never Merfolk for me) and cast Thassa's Oracle. The trigger goes on the
stack. The trigger resolves. Chris offers the fist bump.

I go into literal emotional shock.

Out of nowhere Ben and Dave are next to me giving congratulations and I just
cannot process that I won it. The fatigue of the sleepless night, the day's
thinking, the day's meal habits, the knowledge I still had to drive for 2 and
half hours after and the realisation I had just (almost)perfect run the first
post COVID CompREL Legacy event I attended in paper all crashed into me and I
will admit I basically half broke into tears. (Ben gave me a hug and it was very
much what I needed).

And that was it.

Final scores:

**Match**: 2-1  
**Matches**: 6-0-1  
**Games**: 12-6  
**Non pass-the-turn piles**: 1  
**Fuckups**: Numerous  
**Non-landers Kept**: 1

## Closing Thoughts

What a journey. Once again I want to thank Fran&ccedil;ois and Axion for putting
on a great event, Nik for judging and helping me keep chill when not in the best
state and all my opponents for being lovely people. I want to especially thank
Dave, Josh and Ben for being there between rounds and at the end to help keep me
somewhat sane. (They also did pretty well going 4-2 in the Modern Trios
together!) It was a great weekend for Bristol folks all round really with
another local taking the win of the Trios event entirely.

List felt great. I was very happy with the extra discard which overperformed and
other than that awkward R1M1G1 I didn't miss Deep Analysis at all. I'm going to
stick with this config for now until I see reason to do otherwise.

Other top 4 decklists for any interested:

- Chris's [UW Delverblade](https://www.mtggoldfish.com/deck/4597883)
- David's [UR Delver](https://www.moxfield.com/decks/_4DNlOxgUk22qOoy3UVXXQ)
- Callum's [Imperial
  Painter](https://twitter.com/callumsmithmtg/status/1490619068898062337)

As always if you want even more content please check out our
[resources](/appendices/resources) page which includes a list of community
streamers.

If you would like to submit any content to the Wiki then please contact
AngryBacon in the [Doomsday Discord](https://discord.gg/vajvFXt) or contact
Doishy on the Discord if you wish to discuss anything mentioned in the article
further.

And remember, as Sakurai Shouichi states in Riichi Mahjong Flow Book 1:

> Call hands that need to call, win, then win again next round.
>
> &mdash; Flow Book 1: AWAKENING YOUR MAHJONG POWER by SAKURAI Shouichi

Keep hands that need to jam, win, then win again. If you keep winning, you can't
lose.

xxxx

![Doishy picking up his prize](/media/pictures/2022.axion-doishy.jpeg)
