---
title: Playing Around Surgical Extraction
---

When people are sideboarding to face Doomsday there is one card that they so
often bring in along with all the discard, counter-magic, spheres and such;
{{Surgical Extraction}}. This card is particularly annoying as it performs a
number of functions against us. It removes options from our piles that can be
very key (commonly LED). It can take out the namesake card (assuming no BW or
after BW into DD) and worse of all it can cause us to shuffle our perfect five
card piles and make them all but useless.

Let us discuss a basic pile and in what points SE may affect it.

Each step represents a point we pass priority to our opponent post DD.  
Here we are making the assumption that the mana for our draw spell is not
generated by a LED.

## Example 1

> SW in hand - {{BBB}} + {{UU}} - 6 Storm

<pile>{{!IU}} {{!LED}} {{!LED}} {{!SW}} {{!BW}}</pile>

Doomsday has resolved.

1. Activate SW
2. Cast IU
3. Cast LED
4. Cast LED
5. Activate SW
6. Cast BW
7. Cast ToA

From the above lines. Once the opponent has let IU resolve without using SE then
it is too late for it to be effective (step 3 onwards). If they use it at step 1
then you have a very low percentage of having a useable pile where IU is still
on the top of the stack and BW is still at the bottom.

Point 2 gives you a somewhat better chance however it is still poor as it relies
on BW being your last card. Alas it is my experience that people tend to
Surgical as soon as they can into a stack therefore relying on your opponent to
*mess up* is not an effective strategy here.

## Example 2

> SW in hand - {{BBB}} + {{2R}} - 6 Storm

<pile>{{!AoI}} {{!LED}} {{!LED}} {{!BW}} {{!SW}}</pile>

Doomsday has resolved.

1. Activate SW
2. Cast AoI
3. Cast LED
4. Cast LED
5. Cast BW
6. Cast ToA

This is a very similar set of circumstances however we actually have a higher
chance of success despite a resolved SE. Point 1 we have a few more permutations
that will work as opposed to a single potential iteration of the stack.  
We now have success if AoI is the first card or the second card if SW is the
first. Beyond that is does not actually matter on the ordering of the cards.

Likewise point 2 is pretty much guaranteed to succeed as even if they re-order
you will still *draw* both LEDs and BW with the ability to cast it all.

We improve our chances of success further by using our other cantrips to draw
into the stack. The *Look at the top three cards of your library...* and *...you
may shuffle your library...* clauses on Ponder, the *Scry 2* from Preordain and
the *Draw three cards, place two cards from your hand onto the top of your
library* from Brainstorm all give you a higher chance to place the IU, AoI or TW
first in the stack.

There are a couple of ways of beating Surgical. Obviously the use of discard or
silence effects can help protect you however sometimes you might be facing an
active Snapcaster with Surgical in the graveyard or something similar. Forcing
the opponent to panic *use it or lose it* is the best way to stop them getting
full value out of it. What they try and use it on in this instance obviously
depends on what is currently targetable in your graveyard. Trying to work out
what the opponent will go for requires some good observational and psychological
skills.

Say they have a Surgical in hand. Your graveyard contains: Flooded Strand,
Street Wraith, Polluted Delta, Brainstorm, Ponder. What are they likely to
Surgical?  
From my experiences they normally aggressively try to hit Brainstorm. Everyone
knows BS is busted right? What if there was also a Lotus Petal in the graveyard
too? Would they try and limit your mana choices or still hit the notorious
cantrip?

There are some cards that are certainly more obvious targets than others.
Doomsday is the main one followed by Lion's Eye Diamond and Dark Ritual.
Depending on your list and what the opponent has seen they might also be very
tempted to try and get Burning Wish too. Very rarely do people aim for your
protection spells and though they sometimes do they don't often try and hit the
other cantrips.

Another thing you can try and do to play against Surgical pre-combo turn is to
actually lever advantage from it. Try and use your discard to hit it with an
active Brainstorm available. In response to their Surgical you can cast it and
use the resolving Surgical as a shuffle effect. Alternatively you might cast a
Brainstorm and fail to find a fetchland, you can use any discard available
(assuming no big risk to your hand) to then force the shuffle effect to occur
with the tasty BS in the yard as a bait target.

Obviously not everyone plays the same and many will not adhere to the
suggestions written above. You should be able to get a feel yourselves on your
own local metagames and as people play against you more, they will of course
improve their judgement on what to target. In larger events you should be able
to get some more mileage out of opponents misplaying surgical effects as a
result of not being used to facing Doomsday.

Another example of getting around SE is simply going off with your draw tool in
hand such as AoI, TW, IU or IC. Especially with pass-the-turn piles you can use
this to ignore the shuffle from the SE and just draw everything you need. This
of course favours a LM line of play which may not always be optimal depending on
the circumstances. It also means you must avoid using CB recursion or risking
anything to the graveyard that may be under threat or in multiples later.

One trick to consider is, if you go off with an uncracked fetch and the draw
spell in hand, you can use that and place a land in your stack to reduce it by a
card ensuring your draw spell draws every piece you need. This does favour the
use of AoI and TW over IU simply for the versatility of being able to use LED
with no drawbacks.

> Pass the turn, AoI in hand - {{BBB}} + {{2R}}

<pile>{{!Abandon Hope}} {{!Isl}} {{!LM}} {{!LED}} {{!SW}}</pile>

## Summary

1. It's always better to go off without an opposing SE being present
2. SE can be played around
3. Opponents can often panic-extract the wrong thing
4. The trick is timing and not allowing them the gap to cast it
5. AoI and TW are better tools than IU versus SE
6. An opposing SE effectively reduces by 2 the amount of Storm count required
