---
authors: Doishy
banner: CoV | ONS
kind: REPORT
tags: [LEGACY, MEANDECK]
title: "Legacy at Axion's Mega Weekend Birmingham: Speculating that Positive Life EV"
---

## Table of Contents

## Preface

On the weekend just gone (9th and 10th of April 2022)
[Axion](https://www.axionnow.com/) hosted their second CompREL Mega Weekend
since the whole COVID thing started. This included a massive Modern event, a
unified Modern trios event and the return of one of their infamous Mega Legacy
events too. Once again Fran&ccedil;ois's (the lovely owner) team pulled out all
the stops putting up duals for the entire top 8 plus a _Diamond_ top 8 for 9th
to 16th, a _Platinum_ top 8 for 17th to 24th, _Chocolate_ top 8 for 25th to 32nd
and a _Raspberry Muffin_ top 8 for 33rd to 40th all of which had various goodies
up for grabs.

With 106 players for the event which sold out in under 3 hours it was going to
be a good day. I wasn't actually sure I was going to be able to make it and
thought I had missed getting a ticket but a friend who had bought one decided to
give me theirs and jump into the Modern trios event instead which meant I could
aim for [the repeat!](/articles/2022/02/10/axion-mega-report)

This time the event was hosted at the University of Birmingham's Great Hall
which is a really nice venue. With some nice weather and the campus ground at
your disposal (and free parking to boot) it made for a super pleasant
between-round setting (especially when your rounds are nice and quick). So as I
mentioned 106 players, 7 rounds of swiss and a tonne of top 8 potential, it was
gonna be a long day!

Alas this time around I am not sure if I can get proper metagame information so
if it can be acquired, I will look to get it out in some form, maybe not on this
platform. As a result this article will focus mostly on my day, list and
thoughts of the event so apologies anyone looking for an article with more of an
open theme to it xxxx

Axion have posted the [top 8
decklists](https://events.axionnow.co.uk/Information/MEGALegacyApr2022) but alas
no full metagame data is available :(

## Decklist and Event Preparation

Decklist:

::decklist{path=2022/04/15/zero-respect}

List wise we had made one change since last time going down to 3 :card[FoN] in
the side and adding a second :card[Flusterstorm]. I was happy with the list and
any further changes would feel a little too arbitrary. I had been debating maybe
looking to drop the {R} splash because I find it rarely used but better to stick
with what I trusted in. I did actually do a small extra bit of prep in mapping
my sideboard plan for 8-Cast, which will become very relevant later, as I
realised I did something different every time and suspected the deck to be
popular (spoiler, it was).

:::row{variant=HAND}
Force of Negation
Flusterstorm
:::

As practice/training for the event I spent a day playing Mahjong, ran two proper
leagues with my list and streamed one league with 4 copies of :card[Battle of
Wits] and 3 copies of :card[Yorion, Sky Nomad] in (so they can be found with
:card[Intuition]) in the side.

[Optimising Yorion Doomsday VOD](https://youtu.be/UCtjn48YXGY)

In all honesty I didn't really prep for the event in terms of gameplay. I am now
at a point where I feel confident in my play and be able to form at least some
plan for most matchups (super rogue brews aside). As I trust in my mechanics and
judgement the main thing I decided to focus on for this event was my _mental_.
Now I am someone who can stress out easily especially when I perceive something
as important which can lead to early mistakes, getting flustered over them and
then it cascading into a full blown 0-3 drop scenario with high potential for
inward-facing frustration. Because I am very much aware I am like this, I wanted
to get myself in as good a position as I could to avoid it (and avoid the high
fatigue, feeling awful state I was in for the last event).

So I went to bed early, made sure to pack a lunch, had some healthy fruit
snacks, my trusty water canteen, made sure to spend a lot of time between rounds
in the sun outside, conversed with lots of the lovely legacy community and saved
a special dark chocolate bar for the end. I travelled up with 3 friends who were
competing in the Modern trios (go team Experimental Friend-zy!) and had prepped
a fun and heavy playlist for the journey up. We got to the venue early, enjoyed
a fruit smoothie in the campus cafe before the event and it very much all
helped. I generally felt brilliant all day even when the performance decline
happened! All in all good mental was achieved throughout with 120% success!

## Main Report

As stated we drove up as a group (kudos for driver Seb!) to the dulcit sounds of
Metalcore, Skindred and Lil' Jon and got to the venue. We had an explore around,
found the venue and got drinks (coffee for the boiz, smoothie for me). My event
started first so I slunk away and got seated already seeing a lot of familiar
faces from the previous event and other known community members, some not seen
since pre-pandemic! Once the player meeting had finished up and with thunderous
applause to the re-introduction potential of team trios (Pioneer, Modern and
Legacy) for future events our head judge, the almight Winter (Bristol local)
kicked everything off!

### Round 1 vs. Simone on Oracle Lash Combo

We had been seated prior to the player meeting and so Simone and I had already
had a chance to chat and joke about. He is a lovely player and his deck choice
is fucking sweet.

I managed to win the dice roll and we both keep seven. I do some cantrip type
things and maybe :card[PT] for a Doomsday to which he makes comment on. He lead
on just Island which then returned to his hand as I attempted to hit him with a
:card[Tsz]. The Island was then replaced with a :card[SI] to which I suddenly
knew something funny was afoot! I untapped on my turn 3 with a tricky decision
to make. Now I know Shelldock is a symmetrical check. Assuming my opponent is
aware too then I had to cast Doomsday and pass the turn. If I do and there is
something nasty like an :card[Em] under there then I am well and truly fucked.
But, waiting means more time for them to do whatever they are doing or finding
disruption. As a result I decided to risk jamming and seeing what happened.

:::row{variant=HAND}
Shelldock Isle
:::

I build something using :card[IU] and pass. They drop the know Island and pass
back. I go for it and they try to :card[FoW] from under their Shelldock. I fight
over it and drop :card[TO] getting the day off to a good start.

Sideboard wise I brought in :card[Duress] and some REB effects. Shaved some
:card[SW], :card[Pre] and the :card[Watery Grave] for the :card[Volcanic
Island]. I honestly had no real idea what Simone was on other than maybe it
involved :card[Doomsday], :card[Thought Lash] or maybe :card[Show and Tell]???

Game 2 was really fun. I start 6, opponent 7. They lead on Island into
Preordain. I tutor for Doomsday on turn 1 and get prepped for going off with
protection turn 2 (either Thoughtseize or Flusterstorm). They cantrip some more,
drop a :card[Saprazzan Skerry] and pass. I go to Thoughtseize them and it meets
Force of Negation pitching Thought Lash (the jig is up!). With a Fluster in hand
I decide to try and force the discard spell through but they have a :card[Daze]
for the Thoughtseize anyways. No matter, I am still ready to go for a combo on
turn 3 however my plans are scuppered when they drop a :card[Malevolent Hermit].
Now Hermit is a sweet card that has been seeing more and more play in Doomsday,
ANT and other combo decks. In this scenario it was perfect as it provided a
clock and a perfect counter to me only having one mana source in play (having
used a :card[LP] for Fluster earlier.

I shit you not after Hermit landed I proceeded to draw nothing but Forces and
other stack based interaction when all I really wanted was a cantrip or land. As
a result I was stranded with :card[DR] and Doomsday in hand but no way to beat
the onboard beater. Over the course of 7 turns it whittled me down until I could
wait no more. I tried to follow my one out of finding enough land and a second
Ritual to pay through it and win the same turn but alas it was not to be. It was
funny as fuck and I am happy to have lost that way >.<!

![Hermit Dishing Out the Beats](/media/assets/tempo-player.png)

Game 3 I keep 7, opponent 5 and I lead on a Thoughtseize that sees
:card[Paradigm Shift], :card[SE], :card[Narset, Parter of Veils], Force of Will
and Island. I take Force and they play Shelldock for their turn. I untap, drop
fetch, petal and Doomsday building something with double Oracle, lands,
:card[CoS] and cyclers. The main thing to make sure of is to not risk an Oracle
to getting surgicalled at any point. The opponent does use their surgical on
Doomsday eventually snagging another from my hand but ultimately they cannot
find anything of use (Daze comes out from under Shelldock) and I manage to get
the win!

**Dice Rolls**: 1-0  
**Match**: 2-1  
**Matches**: 1-0  
**Games**: 2-1

### Round 2 vs. Dylan on Food Chain

Just before the match I bump into Greg aka _Dredge Greg_ aka _THE_DADDY_ on
MTGO! He's an ex-Bristol/Wales local who I hadn't seen since pre-covid. It was
lovely to catch up and we talked about how he had crushed me online at the EW
Bayou event last year. (:card[Memory's Journey] too strong). Anyways, onto the
actual round!

Dylan was also super nice (let's be honest, I didn't have a bad opponent all
day) and we both shuffled up with me getting the die roll again. Game 1 is over
on turn 3 where I jam a same turn Ideas pile (without needing :card[LED])
knowing his hand from an earlier discard spell and having seen a
:card[Misthollow Griffin] I knew what was up.

Boarding wise I mostly prepped for :card[Endurance] by bringing in the second
Oracle and added :card[CoV] and :card[Massacre] in case of random permanent
stuff. I think I also brought in maybe the Duress, I forget.

I go to 6 whilst Dylan keeps seven. I Duress him turn 1 with only one valid
target in :card[Mystical Dispute] and the rest of his hand being Endurance,
:card[Ice-Fang Coatl], Griffin and some lands. I disrespect Endurance by just
jamming turn 2 and setting up a pile with double Oracle in and countermagic for
the first Endurance if needed. In the end I just need one Oracle to get the job
done.

It's definately a tough matchup for Food Chain and I am happy I read the
boarding right as Dylan did reveal a cheeky :card[Torpor Orb] in the list.

**Dice Rolls**: 2-0  
**Match**: 2-0  
**Matches**: 2-0  
**Games**: 4-1

This was where we enjoyed the first half of our sandwhich and a banana. Nom nom.

### Round 3 vs. Stu on Grixis Control

I had been joking about with one of the Legacy Breakfast Stus during the
previous round as they were sat near me and lamenting not playing what I was.
Strangely enough I then got paired against the other one the next round. I had
been talking to one of their mates earlier and knew they were all on control
variants of some sort but no idea exactly what.

I keep 6 whilst Stu retains 7. I think I tutor or cantrip to start with whilst
he just drops basic Island. Turn 2 I Doomsdy which just resolves and I build a
PTT pile with Cavern and the ability to fight over Endurance (making sure it
also survived :card[Day's Undoing] in case it was Jeskai. I pass and he drops
fetch into get :card[Badlands].

"This is a combination I have not seen in a very long time" I remark. As only
ANT and Grixis Control play that sort of manabase and I knew he wasn't on combo
I had an idea what was happening. I pass a number of turns going down to 6 life
thanks to cycling and fetching. Oracle comes down and he goes to :card[Lightning
Bolt] me which is fine, go to 3 life. He then fetches and goes to Bolt me again.
I Force (2 life), he Forces, I :card[PoN] having prepped it in case of
Endurance. Pact resolves and I get the win.

This is where I have to extol Stu's virtues! As soon as he reaches for his
sideboard he utters "Fuck" and calls a judge. It turns out he forgot to de-side
after his last match. I was scared that he was going to lose the match by
default thanks to this but thankfully because it was between games, he had
noticed and called it upon himself and none of the cards had come up at all in
game 1 it was a non-issue with a verbal wrist-slap which was good as it meant we
could enjoy the rest of the match properly!

Boarding wise I was most scared of Thoughtseize from them over anything. Second
Oracle, Flusters and Duress came in. I left the REBs out for the time being but
was worried on Narset potential and :card[Dress Down] being an issue. Chain of
Vapor came in for those!

We both keep 7s for game 2. I get in an early discard spell and see
:card[Baleful Strix]. Narset, Bolt, Day's Undoing, :card[Pnd] and :card[Jace,
the Mind Sculptor] with some lands. I had a think and decided to take the
Narset. Turn 3 I jam and make a PTT pile with double Oracle and Cavern in making
sure to stack it in such a way I cannot get punished by a Thoughtseize into
Surgical on the fish. Stu draws blank and goes for the natural Day's Undoing. I
do some quick maths with a hand of Forces, Chain of Vapor, and a cycler. My pile
had a Ponder and an Ideas Unbound in. I had 11 cards across my hand, graveyard
and library and could guarantee hitting an Oracle and getting to at least 2
cards left thereafter so I let it resolve, He finds nothing and I resolve Oracle
off Cavern with a silly amount of interaction available.

What would you have taken here?

:::row{variant=HAND}
Lightning Bolt
Narset, Parter of Veils
Jace, the Mind Sculptor
Day's Undoing
Baleful Strix
Ponder
Volcanic Island
:::

**Dice Rolls**: 3-0  
**Match**: 2-0  
**Matches**: 3-0  
**Games**: 6-1

### Round 4 vs. Stuart on Yorion Death and Taxes

Poor Stu had a bad day with me. He had worked out what I was on and knew it was
going to be tough but he was a super great lad and gave me the details on the
Northern legacy scene which sounded really fun (weekly Legacy events average 9
players with 7/8 of them on combo, sounds great to me!). This was an intense
match and was very close!

I managed to win yet another die roll (this was getting silly now) and keep a
decen if slow-ish 7 whilst he went to 6. I manage to snag a :card[Stoneforge
Mystic] with a Thoughtseize leaving some :card[Rishadan Port]s in hand along
with a :card[Mother of Runes] and :card[Flickerwisp]. It's a little late but I
resolve Doomsday turn 4 and make a PTT pile that can beat double Port and
Wasteland. Now he had been chipping me down with _Mom_ so life total was looking
okay and the wisp hadn't appeared at all. Even despite a :card[Thalia, Guardian
of Thraben] coming down Based on my calculations I was going to end the game
with an empty library at 1 life. Now the element I did not account for was
:card[Urza's Saga]. Even with this out I was like "it's fine there is nothing
that can punish me plan other than maybe a :card[Pithing Needle] on one of my
fetchlands combined with a swords to prevent me winning with an empty library.
As a result when it came to the 3rd counter trigger I sacrificed both lands in
response ready and safe in the knowledge that nothing he could do could hurt me.
Then he tutored up a :card[Shadowspear].
I'd forgotten about that card.

Bugger.

So he takes game 1 and we go to boarding. This is easy, bring in Chain,
Massacre, Force of Negations and second fish and take out a smattering of other
bits, discard, Cavern etc.

Game 2 both have 7, I jam turn 1 Doomsday with Daze backup and win. Not much to
say.

Game 3 I go to 6, opponent keeps 7. This game goes quite long and there is a
strong argument for me maybe needing to have mulliganed more aggressively for a
faster hand but I was confident in what I had (I think I was just missing a
Ritual for maximum speed). I stop some sort of hatebear effect but he managed to
land a Stoneforge which finds :card[Kaldra Compleat]. Well now I am under the
gun. I can make a yolo PTT pile that can take one Kaldra hit alongside the
Mystic and survive but I lose if I get double taxed on mana (they had Port
online and a Thalia out too). I basically just built Ideas into land, Oracle
with an emergency :card[EoA] in case of removal. So I lose to second Port,
:card[Wasteland], :card[Ethersworn Canonist], :card[Sanction Prelate] on 2 and
:card[Spirit of the Labyrinth] to name but a few. He gets a Shadowspear down,
knocks me to 1 life and has to pass where I manage to cast Ideas, draw Oracle
and win. That was intense!

**Dice Rolls**: 4-0  
**Match**: 2-1  
**Matches**: 4-0  
**Games**: 8-2

This is where we had to refill the ol' water canteen. Stay hydrated yo!

### Round 5 vs. Autumn on 8-Cast

So yeah, this is the part where the day breaks down.

I check the standings and spy a familiar name joining me on table 1. Autumn used
to be a Bristol local but moved away to bigger and better things including the
small deal of smashing it on the pro circuit. We had both learnt to play Legacy
from the same person and were _brought up_ jamming my Manaless Dredge list vs
their {W} Stax deck. Good clean fun. Now I know they are a very good player and
are likely on a tier deck so expected it to be a tricky fight. We sit down and
have a lovely chat reconnecting and joking about how the Doomsday community went
from 5 players to 1000 almost overnight when Oracle was printed. Our chat was
nice and long as we had a deck check before we started (I had forgotten how
nervous those things make me!) so we kicked off 10 minutes into the round.

Game 1 I continue my streak of bossing die rolls and take the play with a
decent 7. I tutor up a Doomsday and pass. Autumn drops some baubles and cracks
them taking a look and their own library then passes. I have the option to
deploy a _naked_ turn 2 Doomsday here thanks to Petal but as 8-Cast run Forces
and Autumn had a basically full grip I elected to fire off a Duress this turn to
check the coast was clear. It seemed to be with the hand comprising of
:card[Thoughtcast], :card[Kappa Cannoneer] and some lands. Obviously I have to
take the cast and they draw and pass. I slam the Doomsday (didn't find another
mana source so used the Petal) and disaster strikes as they Force pitching the
known turtle. I cry internally. From that point onwards the game slips away from
me with the 8-Cast engine online whilst I struggle to find what I need and I
have to pick it up.

Boarding I go with my planned setup. Flusters come in, Force of Negation comes
in. Oracle comes in. Chain comes in. Discard, a Daze or two, some Preordain etc
all go out.

We both keep 6 and I am ready with a protected turn 2 Doomsday. No Chalice is
forthcoming so I jam. Force of Negation meets Doomsday. Force meets Force. Force
of Negation 2 meets Force. Curses! :card[Emry, Lurker of the Loch] generates an
obscene amount of advantage but I still have a lot of time as no threats are
found however eventualy :card[Chalice of the Void] x2 drop and a Saga starts to
crank up and the perfect run attempt is ended. Big oofs but well deserved to
Autumn who got to and split the finals so congrats to them!

**Dice Rolls**: 5-0  
**Match**: 0-2  
**Matches**: 4-1  
**Games**: 8-4

Second half of the sandwich and satsuma eaten! Keep up the glucose!#

### Round 6 vs. Andy on 8-Cast

I had someone do the maths and worked out that the 5th win would have allowed me
to double ID and lock in top-8. As I was now on a loss I had to get one more win
before the _free round_ could be mine. So now relegated to table 5 we went at it
again.

So I sit opposite Andy who seemed to know exactly who I was and what my agenda
was citing he should probably pack up now. As a result I assumed he was on
12-Post or something having seen it floating around the top tables a fair bit.
We shuffle up and I keep a 6 my opponent a 5. Now I 100% throw this first game.
I have the option for a turn 2 naked Doomsday or a turn 3 Doomsday with maybe
Force backup (blind draw a blue card allowing) and I should have waited. The
opponent had dropped 4 baubles and no lands so must have been holding something
to make the hand keepable but I guess I must have just been a bit off from the
missed game 1 that could have worked last match or something. Needless to say I
throw Doomsday away and opponent gets the engine going. I think this is the
first real mistake I make all day (despite the Shadowspear forgetfulness) so
that's not too bad!

I board exactly the same as last match.

Game 2 I cast Doomsday turn 2 with a PTT pile and win. My opponent has nothing
to really stop me.

Game 3 is a close one. I forget all the details but I know at one point I have
to burn one of my two Forces to stop a :card[Hullbreacher] that tries to snag a
Brainstorm of mine which then means I am unable to fully defend my Doomsday when
I do manage to go for it. I finally end up in a scenario where my land is
limited and I have a hand of Ritual, Personal Tutor and Preordain. I try and do
the maths on my life total vs their construct token and find it lacking but try
to grab a Doomsday anyways. A final hardcast Force on that puts an end to any
sense of being able to ID the last round and I get sent to the shadow realm.

This match felt like game 2 and 3 results would have switched if I had waited
game 1. I think the role of play vs draw is very important when looking at the
decks together. Post board 8-Cast bring Chalice, 8 Forces and Flusters and
Disputes in which gives them an obscene amount of potential interaction so being
able to get under them before they can deploy the Chalice or Mana for
interaction is really important. I had said going into the event that Delver,
8-Cast and DnT were my _decks to beat_ and it looks like I was right with I
think 5/6 of the top 8 in the end being made up of robotic turtles.

**Dice Rolls**: 6-0  
**Match**: 1-2  
**Matches**: 4-2  
**Games**: 9-6

### Round 7 vs. Alex on Moon Stompy

Righty, despite the double walloping I was still feeing really good and had a
small chance to eke in to the top thanks to great breakers if I could smash this
one out. My opponent snap keeps a 7 and I get a little scared as I have to go
down to 5. But what a 5 it was! (And yes, of course I was on the play again).

:::row{variant=HAND}
DR | MMQ
DD
FoW
Con
Underground Sea
:::

Absolutely perfect, I jam a turn 1 Doomsday and make a resilient PTT pile with
Cavern and Island in that could speed up if it needed to. Opponent slams a 4/3
with Haste I have to read and can ignore and I get the win.

Boarding is Forces and Chain. Discard comes out. Cavern must stay in!

Game 2 I think maybe I should have mulliganed more aggressively but this matchup
can really be decided on opening hand roulette with any hand on the draw having
to contend with one of any number of things like Chalice, :card[Trinisphere], or
:card[Blood Moon]. I kept a hand that could defend a bit and go off turn 3
unless I were to find acceleration. I cannot contend with things and get
walloped by Goblins.

Game 3 again was a case of should mulligan more aggressively. I think I want a
turn 1 Doomsday wherever possible to then build a pile with Island, Cavern,
Petal and some speed power. My 7 was perfectly fine but not fast enough for
sure. They slam a :card[Goblin Rabblemaster] and I have to do some maths. If I
can find a Dark Ritual the next turn then I can ignore it and go for the win. If
I don't then I have to fight over it. I follow the odds and Force it. The next
turn I see a lot of cards and finally managed to find Ritual but with no mana
left I have to pass. I am able to get a same turn win next turn assuming no
Chalice or Moon effect and even with Chalice or Sphere I can still make a PTT
pile however it's Blood Moon that slams down followed by a second one! Fuck. On
the Moon I knew I was done for but played in case I could find exactly a Petal
to try and get through but some threats arrived and I could not find the Petal
and thus had to extend the fist bump.

**Dice Rolls**: 7-0  
**Match**: 1-2  
**Matches**: 4-3  
**Games**: 10-8

I would've probably felt quite bad about the certainty of not being able to
enter any top spots but Alex is actually a fucking legend and gave me no time to
be sad as he whipped out two deck boxes and challenged me to a game of OG
Kamigawa Block Constructed. "Two mana planeswalker or durdle beyblade?" he
asked. "Fucking beyblade let's goooooo".

### Bonus Round: BUG Legend Gifts Control vs. Alex on Mono White Aggro

Alex managed to turbo out some serious threats in the form of some :card[Lantern
Kami] and :card[Samurai of the Pale Curtain]. I make some land drops but can't
get anything going as the board fills up with angry 1/1 and 2/2 threats.
Eventually I can cast a :card[Kokusho, the Evening Star] but it is not enough.

Game 2 went a lot better. I was able to get a lot of mana out and start the
sweet :card[Gifts Ungiven] loop of :card[Hana-Kami], :card[Goryo's Vengeance],
:card[Death Denied] and :card[Kagemaro, First to Suffer] going however the whole
time I had a :card[Manriki-Gusari] boosted :card[Hand of Honor] beating me down
which I could not get rid of! I finally had gotten everything ready for a big
take down when what would have been a game ending :card[Hokori, Dust Drinker]
threatened to ruin everything and so I had to commit to taking it down leaving
me low on resources. I finally got Kokusho in attack mode but alas some well
timed removal and a big ol' :card[Patron of the Kitsune] brought it to a close.

That was fucking sweet and was just what I needed! Thank-you for all the games
Alex x x x !

Legacy results:  
**Dice Rolls**: 7-0  
**Match**: 1-2  
**Matches**: 4-3  
**Games**: 10-8

Kamigawa Block Constructed results:  
**Dice Rolls**: 1-0  
**Match**: 0-2  
**Matches**: 0-1  
**Games**: 0-2

So I found the guys, had a chill out and waited for the announcements. Obviously
top 8 was out and second top 8 was likely no go but I had potential for one of
3rd or 4th top 8's and lo' and behold I managed to sneak into the chocolate top
8 at 28th place in the swiss to fight to win a load of MH2 boosters. Not bad!

### Chocolate Quarters vs. Stuart on Yorion Death and Taxes

As I said before, poor Stuart. Yes our lovable round 4 opponent had returned and
he was not happy to see us! I was also one place higher in the standings so got
to take the play again.

Game 1 ended in a matter of minutes. We both have 7 and I had turn 1 Doomsday.
He had no time against the _standard DnT pile_ and couldn't get there.

:::row{variant=PILE}
Scalding Tarn
Polluted Delta
TO
Underground Sea
Island
:::

Same boarding as round 4.

Game 2 my notes are bad but as I recall it was another turn 2 or 3 Doomsday
having mulled to 6 with the ability to pass and chill or the ability to just win
the next turn. He had dropped an :card[Aether Vial] on turn 1 so I was weary for
a Spirit coming down on my Brainstorm. I baited Spirit with a Wraith cycle and
given that was ignored I committed the Brainstorm and won the turn immediately
after Doomsday had resolved. Stu bless him had tried his best but it is very
difficult for DnT for sure!

Legacy results:  
**Dice Rolls**: 7-0  
**Match**: 2-0  
**Matches**: 5-3  
**Games**: 12-8

Kamigawa Block Constructed results:  
**Dice Rolls**: 1-0  
**Match**: 0-2  
**Matches**: 0-1  
**Games**: 0-2

In all the top 8's for the event the prizes were split (so Underground Sea for
first and second!) so recognising my opponent and them being on {U}{R} Delver
(not to mention really wanting a curry) I waited for his round to finish and
made the offer to split giving us 6 packs each and the ability to leave at a
reasonable time. He accepted under one key condition, that we play a game 1.

### Chocolate Semi Game 1 for Pride vs. David on UR Delver

Now then this may seem familiar to those who read the last report and yes! This
is the very same David I had to fight (and somehow managed to best) twice last
time! It seems despite my insistence that this was favourable for him I had
instilled a bit of a complex and he was determined to beat his Doomsday
oppressor! As a result we played a game 1 for fun with him taking the play as
per standings.

I kept a 7 and he a 6. There was an early :card[Delver of Secrets] landing which
put the pressure on revealing a Daze to the flip. After some careful cantripping
and a well timed discard spell I was able to jam turn 3 with a PTT pile that
only lost to Bolt. I had the Ideas in hand and was able to throw a lot of other
cantrips in in case I had to _manually_ dig through it if the Ideas got
countered. Poor David went through something like 12 looks with cantrips but was
not able to find the Bolt and I felt bad as this seemed to only reinforce his
bias!

But like the lovely chap he is we did split the prize pot (and I split my
chocolate bar with him as it only seemed fair) and thus ended the event itself!

Final results:

Legacy results:  
**Dice Rolls**: 7-0  
**Match**: 1-0  
**Matches**: 5.5-3  
**Games**: 13-8

Kamigawa Block Constructed results:  
**Dice Rolls**: 1-0  
**Match**: 0-2  
**Matches**: 0-1  
**Games**: 0-2

I was well chuffed with the results and made the entry back on MHII gacha packs.
Everyone I played with or near was super chill and it was just a great day out.
But it wasn't over yet!

## Post Event Curry

Now if there is one thing to get food wise in Birmingham it is an Indian meal
(yes yes, jokes about British food etc). One of the boiz found us a sweet place
to check out and we went for food and event decompression. Mango Mojito
cocktails refreshed us super well and we ordered a load of stuff to share
including a large naan bread. Holy shit it was huge! It was all very tasty so if
you find yourself in the UK/Birmingham give Royal Watan a try. It's Kashmari
style which means a decent amount of heat and spice nom nom nom.

We finally headed back (again big love to Seb) to the tunes of Die Antwoord, yet
more Metalcore and Reggae Drum and Bass with me finally collapsing in bed (after
a quick play session with one of the cats) around midnight. Holy shit I slept
well!

Amazing day and event 10/10 would go again.

## Post Event Thoughts

So now I need to assess what went wrong around the three lost matches. I think
the first one was pretty unavoidable with the topdeck counter in game 1 and the
double Force pitch in game 2 . The second match obviously included the rushed
Doomsday which should not have happened but the game 3 was an interesting
scenario. In part that may just be the approach needing to be taken for the
matchup with more aggressive mulligans to be sought. The Moon Stompy match I
think was fine with mulligan decisions more than list issues being the main
cause of issue.

I think I am happy with the decklist and boarding choices but if I were to be
the knee-jerk type I would maybe suggest adding one extra bounce spell to the
side, perhaps :card[Echoing Truth] or :card[Hurkyl's Recall] if I really wanted
to target one specific deck. Of the cards in the list the main I like a lot and
it will take a significant reason for me to adjust those numbers for the time
being. The side I think the weakest element is the splash. Now REB is a very
powerful tool but honestly I seem to never need them with discard often proving
more effective. I have brought them in plenty of times but they do not seem to
appear that frequently and sometimes the need to find Volcanic Island can really
hamper progression towards a slower gamestate. I'm not going to change anything
for now but the number of REB effects (3) would be my first potential cut if
anything with maybe a mind to remove the splash entirely.

I do want to play around a little with _ABCD_ (always be casting Doomsday)
Doomsday having a go with taking out Daze, adding in :card[Cabal Ritual] and
getting some :card[Misdirection] action going but not for any serious event
until I have tried it locally / casually first. I am not going to try any of the
Tempo variants because creature combat is not for me.

## Closing Thoughts

And that is it. Once again I want to thank Fran&ccedil;ois and Axion for putting
on a great event, Winter and her team for judging and keeping everything nice
and organised, all my opponents for being lovely people, everyone I chatted with
between rounds or during rounds, basically everyone.

But of course the biggest thanks go to **THE BOIZ** Seb, Ish and Ben who were
the best event/travel/meal companions one could hope for and despite having only
an okay performance themselves they also stayed strong with positive spirits!
Bristol as a whole did great again across both events and I think we can look
forward to even more this year. (Looking at this rumoured giga-event).

![Feeling good after the event](/media/pictures/2022.brum-boiz.jpg)

![Big ol' naan bread](/media/pictures/2022.wrath-of-naan.jpg)

![The sound and smells of the grill were amazing](/media/pictures/2022.tandoori-lfg.jpg)

Thanks for reading and remember that even if your performance is not amazing,
you can still have a great time with good company if you make sure to look after
yourself!

x x x
