---
authors: Doishy
banner: /banners/doomsday.wth.jpg
title: DDFAQs or the Start of Everything You Need to Know about How to End the World in 2020
---

<tweet id="1242429703622782976" />

With the influx of new interest towards the archetype, there has been a rise in
new players gravitating towards our favourite {B}{B}{B} sorcery. With this surge
in new blood there have been a number of questions that keep cropping up for
people either interested, or starting off playing {{Doomsday}}. I had hoped to
at least start answering many of the questions [in my first
article](/articles/2020/03/12/pretty-mean-deck/), which you should really have a
read of before going through this one, however it seems I didn't touch on many
points so hopefully this should provide some clarity on the following things:

1. The different Doomsday archetypes
    1. DDFT
    1. DDEFT
    1. Meandeck
1. Card Choices
    1. Doomsday
    1. Mana Acceleration and Fixing
    1. Cantrips
    1. Protection
    1. Combo Pieces
    1. Manabase
    1. Sideboard
1. Colour Choices
    1. White
    1. Red
    1. Green
    1. No Splash
1. The Mechanics of Resolving Doomsday
1. Learning "Piles"
1. Additional Content Available

## 1. The Different Doomsday Archetypes

Although it wasn't always the case, it seems currently the most popular medium
for discussing specific Legacy archetypes (at the time of writing) is via
dedicated Discord servers for each archetype. The Doomsday community is no
exception to this and though it may seem like a very aggressive and somewhat
shameless plug so early on in this article, there is a purpose to this.

Until recently we had one primary discussion channel for Legacy Doomsday with no
real regard for the different variants however with so many people joining the
server for one specific variant or another, we had to do a little tidy up. Part
of this process included listing the variants out so that people could read a
summary of each and select the one/(s) they liked the sound of to have access to
those select parts of the server. Despite these summaries being present we still
get some confusion as to what the differences actually entail both in terms of
deck building decisions and in terms of personal preferences or gameplay styles.

I will present the three main variants below with the current Discord summary
and a bit more comparison on each.

### 1.1 DDFT (DoomsDay Fetchland Tendrils)

*Lists that utilise traditional elements such as Burning Wish, some sort of draw
3/4 engine and focus on a Storm style approach to winning (however do not always
require storm to win).*

[As mentioned last time](/articles/2020/03/12/pretty-mean-deck/), DDFT is the
traditional name of historical iterations of the deck. We won't do a full
history lesson here however it basically refers to the fact that this is a storm
deck that can play a much longer game if required.

The deck normally incorporates some sort of raw card advantage engine such as
{{Ideas Unbound}}, {{Act on Impulse}}, {{Three Wishes}} or {{Cruel Bargain}} to
enable drawing into the Doomsday pile. {{Burning Wish}} has been used often to
enable additional pseudo copies of Doomsday and newer cards like
{{Echo of Eons}} have been incorporated in lists too. The aim of the deck is to
kill via a Doomsday pile with lethal {{Tendrils of Agony}} or
{{Thassa's Oracle}} or a natural Tendrils storm kill without Doomsday. See an
example pile below:

<row variant="pile">{{!IU}} {{!LED}} {{!LED}} {{!Pnd}} {{!BW}}</row>

Due to the cards used, the deck tends to be Grixis colours sometimes splashing
Green for sideboard options.

### 1.2 DDEFT (Doomsday Experimental Frenzy Tendrils)

*Lists that utilise Experimental Frenzy as the primary engine to win.*

The summary defines this sub-archetype pretty well. {{Experimental Frenzy}} is a
very powerful card advantage engine that can, under the right circumstances,
allow you to transform your entire deck into a Doomsday pile. If you cast a
Doomsday with Frenzy active, you have a deterministic kill that can get through
infinite life should you wish. The deck can pull off the same win methods as
DDFT but also allows winning via infinite copies of {{Collective Brutality}}
amongst other things (see example below).

<row variant="pile">{{!LED}} {{!LED}} {{!LED}} {{!CoBru}} {{!DD}}</row>

Instead of using {{Burning Wish}} for additional copies of Doomsday, the deck
uses cards like {{Lim-Dûl's Vault}} to act as tutor pieces prior to *going off*
and facilitate the kill from an active Frenzy (as they let you stack the top of
the deck you are playing from).

Due to the cards used, this deck also tends to be Grixis colours sometimes
splashing Green for sideboard options.

### 1.3 Meandeck Doomsday (we couldn't decide on a good acronym for this one)

*Lists that are less combo focused and incorporate reactive countermagic such as
Force of Will within their game plan.*

Meandeck Doomsday tends to play a slower gameplan than the other two variants
focussing more on controlling the game prior to *going off*. The deck is more
prone to passing the turn after resolving a Doomsday whereas DDFT and DDEFT are
both more designed to go off the same turn you resolve one. This version plays
less dedicated combo pieces such as {{Lion's Eye Diamond}} and more reactive
control elements like {{Force of Will}}. The deck does not run Storm based win
conditions either. An example pile is below:

<row variant="pile">{{!Pdt}} {{!Pnd}} {{!EoA}} {{!LED}} {{!TO}}</row>

**Note**: At the time of writing this article, this variant is the one having
most success in tournaments.

## 2. Card Choices

One thing newer players always ask is "what is the standard list being played".
This is a difficult question to answer due to the flexibility of the deck to
incorporate different cards and play different strategies/elements. Pilot
preference can also feature heavily meaning where one person may be having
success with one style of list, another person might be doing the same with a
completely different style.

A good example of this is the [Legacy 5-0 league results][league] posting from
21/03/2020 (03/21/2020 for any US folk) which featured two Doomsday pilots, each
playing a Meandeck variant. This shows how different lists can be playing to
same archetype.

This section will go into a breakdown of card choices for a Doomsday deck and
some of the thought processes behind them. The discussion will touch upon
considerations for all three variants as there are common factors between them.

[league]: https://magic.wizards.com/en/articles/archive/mtgo-standings/legacy-league-2020-03-21

### 2.1 Doomsday

Now it seems a bit superfluous to mention but the first part, and the main link
between the variants, is the namesake card itself; {{Doomsday}}. No matter what
variant you are playing, you will be wanting to run 4 of these no matter what.
With Meandeck and DDEFT variants these will often just all be run in the main
however thanks to {{Burning Wish}}, DDFT variants may run three in the main and
on in the sideboard as a wish target thereby increasing the number of pseudo
copies in the deck up to 7 (3 DD, 4 BW).

There are a number of other cards that can also fall into this category
alongside {{Burning Wish}} as cards that are basically designed to find
{{Doomsday}} to win. These include, but are not limited to, the aforementioned
{{Burning Wish}}, {{Lim-Dûl's Vault}} and {{Wishclaw Talisman}}. They are
mostly there to increase your Doomsday count beyond 4 as it is normally the card
that needs to resolve to enable you to win the game. {{Experimental Frenzy}}
also falls under this category as it generally counts as a card that will
normally win you the game if it resolves.

A deck generally wants to have between 4 and 8 primary *bombs*. Any less and you
are likely to not find your game winning spell, any more and you can often be
flooded with redundant copies.

<row variant="centered">{{!DD}} {{!EF}}</row>

### 2.2 Mana Acceleration and Fixing

As the primary win condition for the deck is a 3 mana card, this can be quite a
struggle to get to in a format like Legacy where resource efficiency is prized
above all else. With cards like {{Thalia, Guardian of Thraden}} in the format,
it is important to be able to resolve your game winning card fast to prevent
your opponents from dropping hate elements or simply to outrace your opponent to
prevent them winning the game first. To facilitate this, a number of mana
acceleration options are used.

The deck normally plays out like a mono {U} deck to begin with, cast cantrips
and setting up but then needs to pivot into almost a mono {B} deck to win. Going
from a {{Wasteland}} proof {U} manabase to something that produces {B}{B}{B} can
be tricky without fixing so along with acceleration elements, fixing elements
are also incorporated.

Cards like {{Dark Ritual}} and {{Lotus Petal}} allow you to get ahead of mana
quickly and can help fix your colours to provide the {B}{B}{B} needed to cast
Doomsday. These are the main mana enablers that can be found across all
variants. Dark Ritual especially allows you to cast Doomsday off of a single B
source which is great against mana denial strategies many decks deploy.

It wouldn't be a post-2019 article without mentioning {{Arcum's Astrolabe}}. By
manipulating the manabase so it includes a heavy Snow-Covered basic count you
can include this efficient {{Prophetic Prism}} that enables mana fixing and does
not lose card advantage whilst playing it.

You may note I have not yet discussed {{Lion's Eye Diamond}} here, this will be
covered in *Combo Pieces*.

<row variant="centered">{{!DR}} {{!LP}} {{!AA}}</row>

#### DDFT and DDEFT

For these variants both {{Dark Ritual}} and {{Lotus Petal}} should be considered
as 4-ofs. In addition some consideration might be given to running additional
acceleration in the form of up to 1 {{Cabal Ritual}} or {{Rain of Filth}}. These
variants want to go fast and as such, the levels of fast mana should be
increased to facilitate this. Conversely, these decks most likely do not want to
run Astrolabe as it promotes a slower gameplay style overall but can still
reasonably incorporate it if desired.

#### Meandeck

Meandeck lists are less concerned with going fast. They still want to run
between 3-4 Rituals as it enables the more mana efficient *kill turns* however
they likely only want between 1-3 Petals, normally around 2 at most. This is the
variant that most favours the Astrolabe fixing plan being able to drop basics at
a steady rate and favouring resilience over speed within the gameplan. If you
are running Astrolabe it should be between 2-4 however higher numbers are
recommended.

### 2.3 Cantrips

Cantrips are a staple of almost any Legacy deck that runs {U} and this one is no
exception. Just like other combo variants, Doomsday wants to find the pieces it
needs as quickly and reliably as it can so it tends to have a greater number of
cantrips relative to other *fairer* decks. Unlike other combo decks like TES
however, the cantrips can actually form an integral part of the combo itself and
so ensuring these are at a maximum is key. You don't want to be having to *burn*
through cantrips to find pieces to then find yourself unable to draw into an
otherwise game-winning pile.

As a result I would expect any Doomsday deck to be running {{Brainstorm}},
{{Ponder}} and {{Preordain}} in various ratios of 4:4:X. In addition to this
some lists will be running the previously cited {{Arcum's Astrolabe}} along with
some spicier elements such as {{Street Wraith}} and {{Edge of Autumn}} however
more on those later. Combine these with some of the cantripping protection
elements and more niche *combo cards* like {{Conjurer's Bauble}} you should end
up with a very high cantrip number.

<row variant="centered">{{!Pnd}} {{!BS}} {{!Pdt}}</row>

#### DDFT

I would expect a modern DDFT list to run the default 8 of Ponder x Brainstorm
and anywhere between 2 and 4 copies of Preordain. I would also not be surprised
to expect maybe 0-2 Street Wraith. If Astrolabe is to be run, it would likely
take the Preordain slot as the deck needs room for its fast mana. As a general
rule of thumb, the less preordain you have, the fast you intend the deck to be.

#### DDEFT

DDEFT would be also wanting to run the 8 plus 2-4 Preordain. Unlike DDFT however
it cannot afford to run either cycling effects like Street Wraith, nor can it
run Arcum's Astrolabe. With {{Experimental Frenzy}} out you cannot easily cast
either card from the top of your deck thus increasing the liklihood of
*whiffing* whilst with a Frenzy out. This shouldn't matter however as a Frenzy
can itself generate such a high potential card advantage that having less
cantrips is considered fine.

#### Meandeck

Meandeck probably wants the highest number of cantrips of any of the variants.
It looks to play a longer game which means trying to hit land drops most
consistently along with finding the normal combo elements. Meandeck should run
the standard 8 plus 3-4 Preordain. Unlike DDFT any Astrolabe being run would be
in addition to Preordains, not instead of. The lists also run between 1-2 Street
Wraith and 1-2 Edge of Autumn.

### 2.4 Protection

No combo deck wants to run into potential permission without first having some
sort of guard up (except maybe Belcher). Interaction is part of what makes
Legacy so much fun and having tools to interact with your opponent proactively,
or to react to their interaction is crucial. This section touches somewhat upon
the later discussion of splash colours but hopefully will keep it to a simple
numbers game for now.

Interaction can come in many forms such as proactive discard effects like
{{Duress}} and {{Thoughtseize}}, reactive cards like {{Force of Will}} and
{{Flusterstorm}}, cards that can perform both roles to an extent like {{Orim's
Chant}} and {{Veil of Summer}} or static abilities such as {{Defense Grid}} and
{{Teferi, Time Raveler}}. Depending on the list you are running these are all
options available to a Doomsday pilot. Normally you would want at least 8 pieces
of protection maindeck with additional sideboard slots dedicated to more
specific interaction.

<row variant="centered">{{!Tsz}} {{!FoW}} {{!VoS}}</row>

#### DDFT

DDFT tends to run around 7-8 protection slots main. The lists that run 7 often
run an additional piece of discard in the sideboard that can be found with
{{Burning Wish}} thereby adding a pseudo additional 4 pieces of discard to that
count. This is normally a split of {{Thoughtseize}} and {{Veil of Summer}} or
{{Thoughtseize}} and {{Duress}} in the main with the sideboard option being
{{Duress}} or {{Cabal Therapy}}. Countermagic is not used in these lists except
as a sideboard slot against other fast combo decks as it interacts poorly with
the card {{Lion's Eye Diamond}}. {W} also tends to not be run as it has limited
beneficial options for the deck so cards like {{Silence}} are less likely to be
seen.

#### DDEFT

DDEFT tends to skimp a little bit on protection. Normally only 6-7 pieces of
protection main. These also should always be proactive pieces. If
{{Experimental Frenzy}} is on the field and you hit a counterspell on top you
are then stuck with it present on the top of your deck or, in hand where it
cannot be cast at all. {{Thoughtseize}} and {{Duress}} are the favourites over
other splash options like {{Veil of Summer}} as trying to balance mana when
playing off the top of your deck can really put a strain on having the right
colours and you always want {B} in abundance.

#### Meandeck

Meandeck probably has the most dedicated protection slots and the widest range
of available protection/permission to it. It tends to always run at minimum 4
{{Force of Will}} and that is supported by another 7-8 protection slots. These
can be, depending on the splash colours run, any ratio of discard, veils, chant
effects, soft counters or similar and sometimes include pieces of maindeck
removal like {{Abrupt Decay}} too.

### 2.5 Combo Pieces

Although the deck is normally a *one card combo* there are certain other pieces
needed to make it work it the most efficient way possible. These are often cards
that may have limited usefulness outside of winning the game. Normally decks
have 1-2 raw card advantage engine pieces {{Ideas Unbound}}, {{Act on Impulse}}
or {{Predict}} to enable drawing into the Doomsday pile. In addition some number
of cards (0-4) to facilitate getting through the piles easier like
{{Echo of Eons}}, {{Street Wraith}} or {{Edge of Autumn}} are run to make it
more mana efficient to get the win.

{{Lion's Eye Diamond}} falls into this category. Although it can be used to
provide a mana boost when digging into a Doomsday pile or used to cast something
grabbed with Burning Wish, it generally just sits pretty doing nothing prior to
that. It is however one of the most powerful tools when performing the combo and
thus should always be run, albeit to varying degrees. In storm builds it
provides free storm and can enable the easy casting of {{Echo of Eons}}.

Finally some sort of win condition is required. This can be in the form of
{{Tendrils of Agony}}, {{Thassa's Oracle}} or even {{Collective Brutality}}.
{{Burning Wish}} can also take this spot as it can tutor up a Tendrils if
needed. You want to run as few *dead* cards as possibly and generally the win
condition is counted as such so you only want 1-2 of them.

<row variant="centered">{{!ToA}} {{!LED}} {{!TO}}</row>

#### DDFT

DDFT tends to run 1 card advantage spell and this is normally {{Ideas Unbound}}
or {{Cruel Bargain}}. It can also then run either 0-2 Cycle effects and 0-3 Echo
of Eons with a potential 4th as a wish target in the sideboard. Generally the
win conditions are 0-1 Tendrils main (0 if the Tendrils is wishable from the
side) and 1 Oracle main. Tendrils is retained as it takes the requirement to
have Doomsday resolve out by giving the option to win from just a natural
storm-style kill. DDFT lists should run 4 Lion's Eye Diamonds as they have a lot
of utility.

#### DDEFT

DDEFT doesn't need to run a card advantage spell thanks to Experimental Frenzy
however it can elect to run 0-1 {{Act on Impulse}}. Spells that actually draw
cards can be a liability as, with Frenzy out, you will not be able to cast them
however you can still cast cards that have been exiled. This then rules out the
use of Echo of Eons and, as mentioned previously, this also prevents the
effective use of cyclers. DDEFT should also run the full 4 Lion's Eye Diamonds.
Being able to pay {0} for gain {B}{B}{B}, {U}{U}{U} or {R}{R}{R} and draw a
card, all the while effectively ignoring the downside makes it an even more
powerful card than in other lists.

#### Meandeck

Meandeck lists are more prone to passing the turn and playing more reactive
protection so the downside of Lion's Eye Diamond is more significant. Despite
this, it still enables some of the more mana efficient wins and so generally 1
is run. Meandeck lists tend to be able to run the more mana efficient card
advantage engines too so run 1-2 {{Predict}} or {{Ideas Unbound}}. They tend to
run between 1-2 Street Wraith and 1 Edge of Autumn. Edge is crucial as it
provides a life-free alternative to drawing one card deeper into the Doomsday
pile. Finally the win condition is 1-2 Thassa's Oracles. Often it is run as a
singleton main with an additional copy in the sideboard.

### 2.6 Manabase

Being a combo deck, Doomsday does not need to run as many lands as some of it's
fairer {U} cousins. Depending on how fast you intend to try and win and how much
other mana acceleration you are playing a deck should run typically 15-18 lands,
usually around 16/17. This tends to be mostly comprised of a minimum of 4
Polluted Delta, 4 other on-colour fetchlands or 4 Prismatic Vista, at least 1
Island / Snow-Covered Island and 1 Swamp / Snow-Covered Swamp and 1 Underground
Sea. The rest is the a mix of additional Seas, some other U/X and B/X splash
duals and additional basic lands as required. Astrolabe decks tend to run more
basics compared to their non-snow cousins. Even with Astrolabes, you should
consider at least 2 Underground Seas in your list and probably 1 each of the
primary splash colour U/X and B/X dual land.

For example if you are running a Grixis list you should run 1 Volcanic Island
and 1 Badlands and tailor your fetches accordingly so 4 Delta and 4 Scalding
Tarn or 3 Tarn and 1 Bloodstained Mire. Being able to fetch a basic Island is
more crucial than a basic swamp as that tends to allow you to get into the game
in the first place and the majority of your deck is {U} based cantrips anyways.

<row variant="centered">{{!Island|RAV}} {{!Underground Sea|LEB}} {{!Swamp|RAV}}</row>

#### DDFT and DDEFT

As these are more speed oriented lists they tend to stay at the 15-17 land
range. This is normally 4 Delta, 4 Tarn or 3 Tarn/1 Mire, 1 Volcanic Island, 1
Badlands, 2 Underground Seas, 2 Islands and 1 Swamp. Sometimes (if there is a
splash colour) you might add an additional land or replace the second basic
Island with a, in the example of {G}, {{Bayou}} and/or {{Tropical Island}}.
Toolbox lands such as {{Nurturing Peatland}} tend not be be used for these lists
but can be an option.

#### Meandeck

As the more control oriented lists, Meandeck decks tend to go around the 17-18
land mark. This tends to be 4 Delta, 4 Splash Fetch ({{Misty Rainforest}} for
BUG and {{Flooded Strand}} for Esper) or 4 {{Prismatic Vista}}, 1-3 Underground
Seas, 1 of each splash dual (so for {W} 1 {{Tundra}} and 1 {{Scrubland}}) and
2-5 basic lands. Normally 1-4 Islands, 1-2 Swamps, and 0-1 Splash Basic. Some
pilots also elect to run a toolbox land such as a {{Cavern of Souls}},
{{Mystic Sanctuary}} or {{Silent Clearing}}.

### 2.7 Sideboard

Across all the variants and pilots the styles of sideboards can vary
dramatically. Some tailor completely to facing other matchups, some include some
sort of secondary or tertiary win condition and those with {{Burning Wish}} can
even include a tutorable toolbox that can deployed to the main deck game plan.

As any Legacy player knows, mapping sideboards or listing sideboard options can
be an incredibly lengthy process that changes based on meta, collated results
and gut feelings. As a result going into it fully now would be rushing it and it
likely deserves a piece all to itself. As a result I will not be discussing
sideboards fully here however some options will be explored in the next section.

## 3. Colour Choices

Doomsday decks have some interesting choices when it comes to what colours to
run within them. Doomsday itself is a card costing {B}{B}{B} so that immediately
locks in one of your colours. Almost all lists (as discussed above) feature {U}
cantrip shells so the decks are often solidly based in {U}{B} however the rest
of the available colours are all useable within the shell. Below will be a
summary of each variant and the colour options they tend to run followed by some
in depth discussion as to what the different colour splashes bring to the table
in terms of tools.

**DDFT** Normally base {U}{B}{R} with the option to splash {W} or {G}.  
**DDEFT** Normally base {U}{B}{R}, unlikely to run splash colours.  
**Meandeck** Normally {U}{B}{G} or {U}{B}{W} with the option to splash {W}, {R}
or {G}.

### 3.1 White

White is almost exclusively played in Meandeck lists however you could easily
incorporate it into DDFT. Maindeck, {W} provides protection spells mostly in the
form of {{Orim's Chant}}, {{Silence}} or {{Teferi, Time Raveler}} the last of
which can also act as a method to draw into a Doomsday pile or a mini card
advantage engine when the -3 is coupled with {{Arcum's Astrolabe}}. {{Abeyance}}
is another great option that also cantrips and so makes a good initiation spell
for drawing into a Doomsday pile.

From the sideboard {W} offers a plan B in the form of {{Monastery Mentor}} that
plays well with the cantrip dense lists that are run. Removal comes in the form
of {{Disenchant}} or {{Wear//Tear}} for artifact or enchantment hate and
{{Swords to Plowshares}} to deal with problematic creatures. You also gain some
additional graveyard hate options in the form of {{RiP}}.

Teferi and Mentor are probably the biggest boons for playing {W}.

### 3.2 Red

Red is obviously a staple for DDEFT and often for DDFT too. It enables
{{Burning Wish}} in the main deck as a tutor for both the combo elements and
other toolbox cards. From the side it can provide access to alternative win
conditions like {{Empty the Warrens}} and a plethora of removal for different
scenarios such as {{Abrade}}, {{By Force}} or {{Rending Volley}} to name a few.
{R} also gives you access to {{Pyroblast}} / {{Red Elemental Blast}} effects
which are incredibly powerful tools against any {U} based matchup.

Empty the Warrens and Red Blasts are the biggest boons for playing {R}.

### 3.3 Green

Green provides a slightly cheaper package in terms of mana cost. Maindeck it
provides access to protection in the form of {{Veil of Summer}} and super
efficient removal in the form of {{Abrupt Decay}}. From the sideboard additional
Veils/Decays may be brought in alongside other elements such as
{{Carpet of Flowers}} or {{Xantid Swarms}}. {G} does not have a plan B
associated with it however some have explored the use of
{{Oko, Thief of Crowns}} as a potential option or
{{Uro, Titan of Nature's Wrath}}.

Veil and Decay are the biggest boons for playing {G}.

<row variant="centered">{{!Monastery Mentor|FRF}} {{!Pyroblast|ICE}} {{!AD}}</row>

### 3.4 No Splash

There is some potential for running a straight {U}{B} list with no splash
colours. For a speed focused list, use of {{Wishclaw Talisman}} and
{{Echo of Eons}} could allow for a fast win however they may be considered
unreliable. Your protection suite is also limited to countermagic and discard
(both matching poorly against opposing Veil effects) and either {B} based
creature removal or {U} based bounce removal which is not permanent.

There is some scope for a plan B with the use of creatures like
{{Snapcaster Mage}}, {{Dark Confidant}} or {{Rotting Regisaur}} however these
are not the most powerful of tools. Of the plan B options available,
{{Divining Witch}} is certainly the most effective providing a 1 card combo
engine that enables you to both find {{Thassa's Oracle}} and exile your library
with the Oracle trigger on the stack all the while avoiding cards like
{{Spell Pierce}}, {{Force of Negation}} and {{Flusterstorm}}.

Budget and consistent mana is the biggest boon for playing straight {U}{B}.

<row variant="centered">{{!DW}}</row>

## 4. The Mechanics of Resolving Doomsday

We will now move away from the construction of the deck and have a quick look at
the mechanical elements required to actually resolve the card Doomsday. This may
sound silly but I remember, when learning, that this was one aspect I messed up
on a number of times (as a paper only player) and it was only later into my
Legacy 'career' I felt comfortable with it.

A large part of the confusion for the physical resolution of it stems from the
wording on the original Weatherlight printing of {{Doomsday}}. See the card
below along with the original rules text printed:

<row variant="centered">{{!Doomsday|WTH}}</row>

> Pay half your life, rounded up:  
> Put your graveyard on top of your library, then remove all but five cards of
> your library from the game.  
> Put the rest on top of your library in any order.

With this older templating there are a number of pitfalls that can snag the
unwary who have not read up on the updated Oracle text. First of all the "Pay
half your life, rounded up" is not a cost as is implied by the colon `:` but
actually part of the resolution. You will not lose your life for putting
Doomsday on the stack! Despite what the colon present may imply, the resolution
of the card is *not* an activated ability. I have had an opponent before who
read my card and asked a nearby judge "can I name this card with
{{Pithing Needle}}" to which the judge quite correctly replied: "Yes". My
opponent then proceeded to play said {{Pithing Needle}} on the card and was
quite put out that it did not work the way they had hoped it would.

Before the next point let's take a look at the updated Oracle wording on the A25
Doomsday:

<row variant="centered">{{!Doomsday|A25}}</row>

> Search your library and graveyard for five cards and exile the rest.  
> Put the chosen cards on top of your library in any order.  
> You lose half your life, rounded up.

As you can see the wording changes significantly. If you were to perform the
actions specified by the original wording and shuffled your graveyard and
library together you can be called out for a GRV at competitive REL so watch
out. Cards like {{Shadow of Doubt}} will work in preventing you from searching
your library for cards but will still allow you to search your graveyard. One
especially key thing to note is your opponent is allowed to see what cards you
select (if any) from the graveyard as it is an open information zone. You are
not required to explicitly state what you are taking however you should always
allow them time to ask to see what cards are chosen and are not allowed to hide
that information from them.

The last point I want to make on resolving Doomsday is one about time. On MTGO
you have a chess clock that allows you to take much longer on decisions however
in paper there is no such mechanic. As a result I would always advise you know
what pile you are going to make before even considering to put Doomsday on the
stack. This will save you a lot of time and your opponent's will thank you for
it. As Doomsday is (or possibly was) quite a niche deck, a lot of people offline
would generally give a generous allowance during the resolution of Doomsday to
work out the pile you will build however this cannot be relied on, especially
with the deck becoming less and less rogue. Even online you could find yourself
eating at your clock a bit too much which may result in losses across grindier
matches if you're not careful.

The use of pencil and notepad during paper games or just notepad.exe on the
computer is a great way to map out your pile and note mana/draw constraints
whilst planning it. You should also goldfish, goldfish, goldfish! The deck is
unforgiving to mistakes, especially when made after Doomsday has resolved.
Forgetting the order of cards when naming with {{Predict}}, failing to activate
a {{Lion's Eye Diamond}} at the right time or even forgetting to include a win
condition in your pile are all things that can happen!

As a way to minimise your own mistakes potential, just practice playing some
hands, build the piles. Even if they seem super simple it is important to get
the basics down first. Once you have done that you can start to train yourself
on some puzzles or at least have the confidence to face interaction without
worrying about becoming your own enemy.

## 5. Learning *Piles*

There is one final point I wish to touch on which is learning Doomsday piles
(sometimes referred to as stacks). The first questions that people tend to ask
other than "what is the currently played standard list?" is often "what are the
basic piles?". The key mechanics are explained here on the Wiki already and my
last article went over some of them briefly but people then ask for more. One
question that is asked is "can I get a list of piles please?

Back in the days of the Stormboards there was a pile document maintained that
tried to list every conceivable Doomsday pile, the card requirements, mana
requirements and storm requirements however this led to people relying on it. If
they had failed to rote memorise a pile they would panic and get confused.

A better approach is to learn the general rules or theories behind cards and
then apply them to a scenario. Out of all the variants DDEFT probably has the
smallest pool of potential piles and Meandeck the largest however 80-90% of the
time you will only be using a small selection.

If in doubt, practice makes perfect! 100 games trying to build and construct
piles on the fly are much better than trying to memorise 100 potential piles by
rote.

## 6. Additional Content Available

If you want even more content please check out our
[resources](/appendices/resources/) page which includes a list of community
streamers or maybe if you are up for a challenge maybe check out the
[puzzles](/puzzles/) page.

If you would like to submit any content to the Wiki then please contact
AngryBacon in the [Doomsday Discord](https://discord.gg/vajvFXt).

Until next time.

May you avoid the first horsemen of the apocalypse!  
(Stay safe and be kind to one another).

## Post Script Puzzle

d8dk32 recently forwarded me a tweet by Stephen Menendian (designer of the 2012
iteration of Meandeck Doomsday) who posted this screenshot as a turn 1 win in
Vintage. It is in fact also a deterministic turn 1 kill in Legacy Doomsday too!

<tweet id="1242650950415691776" />

Have a go at working out this little puzzle checking the meandeck lists on the
Wiki and see if you can work it out :)  
The answer may be found in our [puzzles](/puzzles/) page.
