---
authors: Doishy
banner: CR | TOR
kind: ARTICLE
tags: [LEGACY, MEANDECK]
title: "May You Live in Interesting Times: The 2022 Doomsday Review"
---

## Table of Contents

## Preface

Hello!

It's been awhile since the last article posted on here and as a result there has
been a lot of things that have been worked on in the community. As there have
been so many changes in terms of subarchetypes of the deck, favouring of certain
cards, disfavouring of others and a few other miscellaneous items to cover I
thought it prudent to try and collate them into one handy mini-review to try to
keep everyone up to date with what people have been trying to play around with
and what discussion has been happening.

I won't have covered everything discussed but hopefully all the main salient
points that have enacted permanent or at least semi-permanent changes across
multiple pilots will be presented here. The order of presentation is literally
what is listed on my little notebook in front of me and has no bearing on scale,
timeline, significance or any sort of sensible narrative.

## Changes in 2022

### Card-Specific Discussion

In this section we shall talk about key deck building considerations related to
single cards (or card groups) that have been varied or talked about heavily this
year.

#### Shelldock Isle

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Shelldock Isle
:::

The first one we'll touch on comes in two parts. The first part is related to a
rules change that was enacted with the release of *New Capenna* in how
*Hideaway* as a mechanic now works.

> ... Exile one of them face down and put the rest on the bottom of your
> library in a random order.

The change was instead of cards being replaced to your library in an order of
your choosing, instead it is now randomised. This doesn't seem like much but it
can have some significant impact if going for a classic :card[Shelldock Isle]
and :card[Em] pile.

Traditionally vs. a {U} based control shell you might build something like this:

> Pass the turn

:::row{variant=PILE}
- SI
- Em
- Thassa's Oracle
- Pyroblast
- Volcanic Island
:::

The idea here is you draw Shelldock, play it and trigger putting Emrakul
underneath it. You would then likely stack so that you can then access the
Oracle next with the idea being you have the opportunity to cast it the next
turn. Either that or you could set up ready with the :card[Pyroblast] and {R}
source in the same turn thanks to the extra turn trigger. Now you receive the
final 3 cards in a random order so might be put in an awkward situation because
of it.

Overall this is a small change and doesn't impact the deck too heavily in terms
of the relative favour of using Shelldock Isle as a sideboard strategy. What is
more impactful is how {U} based control decks have evolved and what their
toolbox looks like these days on how effective this plan is.

Nowadays if you sit across from a Grixis Control player, a Jeskai Pile, a Bant
deck or even Stryfo himself you will expect to face many of the following cards:

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Teferi, Time Raveler
- Wasteland
- Dress Down
- Boseiju, Who Endures
- Back to Basics
- Karakas
:::

All of these are both common, and completely stop the Shelldock gameplan from
working. Teferi prevents the casting of Emrakul, Wasteland, Boseiju and Back to
Basics can all effectively remove the Isle itself, and Karakas / Dress Down both
stop Emrakul doing what it does best and turns it into a glorified :card[Time
Walk].

I personally think running this sideboard plan is too narrow as the matchups it
historically shone in have more than enough tools to deal with it and dedicating
2 pile-specific slots as a result is just too many. It can still be run if you
really want to but I would not advise it and the majority of pilots have left it
by the wayside.

#### Deep Analysis

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Deep Analysis
:::

This time last year :card[Consider] was the new hotness and as a result
:card[Deep Analysis] was allowed to hold the spotlight once more in Legacy.
Obviously we wrote about this a lot and the 2 cards in collaboration enabled the
most mana and card efficient piles you could find. Over the last year though it
has been noted that most of the time, these piles just weren't as effective as
one would hope being too fragile to too many common tools in the format
including :card[Endurance], any countermagic or just being on too low life.

Consider has been an all star card and has established itself as a very
effective tool to the deck. Deep Analysis however is proven to not be worth the
deck slot, even as a potential grinding tool, and the majority of quick or
efficient wins it enables can be mimicked (at least to a degree) through other
means.

Like with Shelldock, you can still run Analysis but it likely won't give as a
much as a benefit as would be wanted for its inclusion.

#### Cabal Ritual

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Cabal Ritual
:::

:card[CR] is by no means a new card to the format. It has been explored in
Doomsday previously on and off since 2020 but didn't really take off in
popularity with either minimal payoff being present for any extra {B} it
produced as discard numbers were quite low, or it just seeming like superfluous
with 4 :card[DR] and 4 :card[LP] already being played.

In 2022 it has become a lot more popular. Why is this? Well I see there are two
main reasons, one of which is often mis-cited.

The first and easiest reason is that people just want more consistency in being
able to jam a quick Doomsday. With many being up to 8 copies of the namesake
card (4 :card[DD] and 4 :card[PT]) then want to enable casting them as fast as
possible and boosting the number of ritual effects facilitates this, even in the
face of :card[Chalice of the Void] set to 1. With 8-Cast being a popular deck in
the format alongside classics like Moon Stompy, this can be quite significant.

The second reason and the one that I see as mis-cited is the impact it has on
being able to aggressively fetch for basic lands or at least one land in
particular. Many people see this as a card that only rewards the playing of
basic Swamp as you can grab Island on turn 1, Personal Tutor for Doomsday and
then fetch basic swamp on turn 2 and Cabal Ritual into Doomsday. In this
scenario, barring the presence of :card[Blood Moon] it actually only truly
enables the use of basic Island with the Swamp being a *dead land* here. Let me
explain why.

Pre-Doomsday you may have concerns about being Wastelanded which are well
founded. Your deck boasts a high number of {U} based tutors and {U} based
cantrips and you need these to find what you are looking for. Other than if you
are running a very heavy discard suite, the only time you really need {B} is to
enable the casting of Doomsday itself. After that you need to achieve {U}{U} to
cast :card[TO]. Because of this general play pattern the Cabal Ritual allows
more aggressive fetching of Island early but you can still happily grab
:card[Underground Sea] as the {B} source. Once Doomsday resolves Swamp doesn't
help cast the majority of the deck. Only discard spells or for taxing effects
like :card[Sphere of Resistance]. As a result it basically acts like a
*non-land* not contributing to the win.

If you had a Sea there then yes, it may be Wastelanded but this then makes it
the same as a the *non-land* Swamp. If it survives however then you now have an
additional {U} source with which to make use of.

If people do include Cabal Ritual it tends to be as a 1 to 3-of and normally
replaces 1 Petal and some number of extraneous :card[Preordain] slots or maybe
some interaction slots. It is certainly not a requirement, expecially if you
aren't keen on including basics in your list but it is a useful tool for
consideration.

#### Daze

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Daze
:::

It wasn't until around April 2020 with the work of Jax that :card[Daze] became a
mainstay tool in Legacy Doomsday lists and from that point on it was almost
always a guaranteed 4-of in most decks. Recently the popularity of Daze in
Doomsday has dropped with many pilots no longer opting for the full playset but
dropping down to sometimes 3, 2, 1 or even 0 copies. Some people have looked to
use it as a 2-of with another 2 in the board. Some like having just the 1 to
present to the opponent so they have to fear its presence if they see it when
scanning the exiled deck in game 1. Some feel it no longer does enough to
justify the slots and instead wish to rely more heavily on discard spells or
even maindeck :card[Flusterstorm] to win the game.

So why has Daze seemingly become perceived as less worthwhile in Legacy
Doomsday?

Let's think about the matchups Daze shines in vs. the ones it is weak to.

Daze shines when you have a mana efficient start and need to buy just a little
bit of time. It works really well against decks like Stompy and Death and Taxes
where they have to try and play on curve threats to retain parity with the
unfair strategy you are aiming to progress. Daze allows you to turn land light
hands with Rituals into fast wins whilst preventing the playing of cards like
:card[Trinisphere] and :card[Spirit of the Labyrinth].

Where Daze is less effective is against decks that either don't present the
chance for it to work such as {U}{W} control decks which can just play a land
"say go" strategy or that utilise low resource plans more effectively than
Doomsday does such as {U}{R} Delver. It can help if you are on the play and have
a turn 1 combo turn but other than that, in these styles of matchup it can be
more of a liability than a help.

Comparing these 2 main groups we can already see the former includes many decks
that Doomsday can already fair pretty well against whilst the latter includes
archetypes that the deck struggles against or are closer to 50-50. With this in
mind it seems, to some, that shoring up the matchups where the natural archetype
advantage is not as prevalent is more useful than retaining something that *wins
more* against decks we might already be favoured against.

Daze is still a very powerful card and running it, even as a full playset is
still very effective. Whether you do play it at all, and how many if yes, really
depends on your own gameplay preferences and the mental list of decks you want
to tailor yourself towards beating.

One small bit of fun is with many pilots now varying the numbers of Daze present
in their lists, non-Doomsday players are now forced to keep guessing about
whether they need to be playing around it or not. The best Daze is always the
one you never have to cast but instead just the passive threat of it maybe being
present can be enough to buy time when needed.

#### Ideas Unbound

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- IU
:::

:card[Ideas Unbound] has been a staple since before :card[Sensei's Divining Top]
got banned (too soon). Amongst itself, :card[Night's Whisper], :card[Predict]
and other multiple draw spells like :card[Jeska's Will] it has always come on
top as the most efficient way to safely dig multiple cards into a pile and have
extra resources for later. Some people have been cutting this card in favour of
simply relying on cycling effects and :card[Consider] to enable multi-draw
piles. Some piles like those using :card[Brainstorm] can be mimicked without the
need for Ideas.

Let's take a look at this example from the [Brainstorm
chapter](/meandeck/brainstorm) of the Wiki:

> {U} + Brainstorm + X

:::row{variant=PILE}
- LED
- SW
- IU
- LP
- TO
:::

You can simply change a couple of cards and it still works:

> {U} + Brainstorm + X

:::row{variant=PILE}
- LED
- SW
- Consider
- SW
- TO
:::

Let's look at the steps to complete the pile:

1. Cast Brainstorm and put back X then Consider on top.
1. Cast LED, cycle Street Wraith cracking LED for {U}{U}{U} and draw the
   Consider.
1. Cast Consider, mill X, drawing the Street Wraith.
1. Cycle Street Wraith and use the remaining {U}{U} to cast TO with an empty
   library.

This shows one example where people have thought Ideas is maybe obsoleted. In
some of these discussions regarding the usefulness of Ideas Unbound, the word
*crutch* has been thrown about a lot in relation to Ideas giving some people the
false impression that it is a card for new players and isn't actually good.

I want to clarify this is not true. There are a number of piles that only Ideas
can facilitate and plenty of examples where it shines.

Take this example playing around :card[Endurance]:

> 3 {U} producing lands in play.

:::row{variant=PILE}
- IU
- SW
- Thassa's Oracle
- Cavern of Souls
- SW
:::

Here you can win against an opponent who has double Endurance available.

1. Draw Ideas for turn.
1. Cast Ideas and draw Street Wraith, Oracle and Cavern.
1. Play the Cavern and Cast Oracle.
1. Oracle will trigger with 1 card remaining in library.
1. If they Endurance, allow the trigger to resolve and you will have 3 cards
   remaining in library.
1. Before the Oracle trigger resolves, cycle Street Wraith to draw the second
   Street Wraith. 2 cards now remain in library.
1. If they Endurance again, allow the trigger to resolve and once more cycle
   Street Wraith.
1. Oracle trigger resolves with 2 cards left in library.

If you run :card[Pact of Negation] then Ideas also is the easiest way to enable
a pile to draw Oracle, mana and protection all in one go.

The main takeaway from this is as follows: you don't have to run :card[Ideas
Unbound] however it is still a powerful tool in the Doomsday arsenal and should
not be disregarded lightly.

#### Basic Lands

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Island
- Swamp
:::

Basic lands have always held an interesting deckbuilding space in Legacy. They
dodge a lot of strategies usage of cards like Wasteland, Blood Moon or
:card[Back to Basics] but can really hinder your mana development, especially in
a deck like Doomsday that needs to pivot from {U} to {B}{B}{B} to {U}{U}.
Certain styles of Doomsday, especially the slower styles of the deck tend to run
a high basic land count compared to faster versions of the deck (and yes we do
think of 2 as a high count).

This year there has been a lot of discussion on whether 0, 1 or 2 basics is
correct to run. Some people think the game should end before it matters and thus
have tried a 4 Seas, 2 :card[Watery Grave] mana base whilst others want to be
able to cast all their spells in the face of denial heavy {U}{R} Delver so opt
to run both basic Island and Swamp.

As with many of the deck building decisions I don't think there is a default
correct answer however I would advocate at the very least most people to justify
the cutting of the Island from any list. The efficacy of Swamp has been
discussed above already around the impact of Cabal Ritual and although {B} is
needed to cast Doomsday, Island is more important to the deck as it is the land
that casts the card with "Win the game" printed on it. Many strategies like
Lands have a hard time beating a resolved Doomsday but the one way they tend to
be able to do it is to deny mana, specifically {U} mana and prevent the casting
of Oracle. Island protects against the aforementioned Wasteland and Boseiju
aggression and can partially insulate against Ghost Quarter too.

When writing up any list you need to decide how many turns you want to be
waiting until you cast Doomsday, how much you want to rely on Ritual effects to
do so, how heavy your metagame is full of mana denial and various other factors
when deciding whether to run basics and if so, how many and which ones to run.

### General Subarchetypes and Nomenclature

In this section we shall talk about the different flavours of Doomsday lists and
the innovations that have been worked on some of them.

This year saw a lot of nomenclature thrown around for *Turbo Doomsday* and the
newly dubbed *Tempo Doomsday* alongside a myriad of others which we shall
discuss in a moment however people often get concerned as to what happens when
their list doesn't fit into any of these common labels. First of all don't worry
too much. It might be you only own a single :card[Personal Tutor] thus you
probably aren't going to be finding early Doomsday kills as often as a
traditional *Turbo* list which runs 4 of them but you don't want to splash {W}
for an Esper list and aren't into playing a fairer game like a *Tempo* list.
This is totally fine. Doomsday is still a flexible shell and just because your
list doesn't conform to one of these listed subarchetypes, doesn't make it
immediately inferior in any way. The only reason the below subarchetypes are
being highlighted is simply because they have been either the most popular
variants or to most novel for 2022.

#### Turbo Doomsday

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- PT
:::

The label *Turbo* has now become pretty accepted to mean *Doomsday running 3-4
copies of Personal Tutor*. It tends to want to win faster often sacrificing
later game selection (normally running only 0-1 Preordain) in favour of early
game consistency. Likewise these lists tend to run around 15 lands and normally
stay {U}{B} or occasionally splash {R} but almost never touch onto {W} or {G}
with the sideboard often being the only home of the splash cards and lands.

The main changes to these lists have been the general adoption of 2 Oracle main,
the general reduction in the use of Daze and the increase in the use of Cabal
Ritual and Discard spells like :card[Duress] and :card[Thoughtseize] mainly
thanks to the Ragavan ban from earlier this year.

Here is an example decklist from a recent 5-0 posting by Alex2.

::decklist{path=2022/09/15/alex2}

You can see the changes mentioned alongside a common adoption of a 2:2 split of
cycler cards and the inclusion of just the basic Island.

#### ABCD Doomsday

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Misdirection
:::

ABCD has become a community favourite saying this year with it standing for
*Always Be Casting Doomsday*. This started as a way to advise people they should
be trusting in the power of the card and jamming it early and often however a
variant of the more common *Turbo* lists has appeared with this moniker applied
to it as a naming convention.

The main differences between a *Turbo* list and an *ABCD* list is the latter is
even more geared towards resolving early Doomsday often. It tends to have a
higher fast mana count, sometimes forgo some pile cards like Ideas Unbound and
runs a reduced interaction suite assuming you only need a single piece often to
jam early. As part of the interaction arsenal it often removes Daze entirely but
does include additional *pitch* protection in the form of :card[Misdirection].
One way these lists have been described is as if they are pre-boarded vs. decks
like 8-Cast and Delver but will maybe not be as well geared against other
archetypes as a result.

Here is an example decklist from a 3rd place Challenge result in April by
*Wonderpreaux*.

::decklist{path=2022/09/15/wonderpreaux}

This list still has an Ideas Unbound in as well as retains a single Daze but
others elect to run things like Preordain or Pact of Negation instead.

#### Tempo Doomsday

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Malevolent Hermit
- Murktide Regent
:::

A new label for a previously explored concept appeared this year. *Tempo*
Doomsday basically indicates any Doomsday list that shares its deck space with
another plan, normally a creature based fair one. Previous examples of this
concept have included the use of :card[Uro, Titan of Nature's Wrath] or
:card[Delver of Secrets] as additional threats to either provide alternatives or
to try and synergise with Doomsday itself. :card[Baleful Strix] is often a
staple inclusion in this style of deck acting as a speedbump to facilitate
either side of the deck.

This year has seen the design space of this half and half combo vs. fair plan
explored in a much more in-depth fashion to a lot more success and popularity
than before. This is largely thanks to the inclusion of new creatures like
:card[Malevolent Hermit], :card[Murktide Regent] and :card[Dragon's Rage
Channeler]. All these creatures have been tried and found to incorporate into
helping the Doomsday plan as well as being powerful in their own right for the
potential of a fair game plan.

The advantage of these lists is they can pivot between a pure combo deck and a
pure control deck with the latter being strong against the traditional Doomsday
nemesis of {U}{R} Delver. The downside of the list is sometimes you draw half of
one plan and half of the other or the wrong plan for the wrong opponent in game
1 and this can cause some friction. Despite this a lot of people have put up
strong results with this style of deck and it has proven itself worth the time
to try.

Here is an example decklist from the winner of the August Game Taitan Legacy for
Real Estate event by RoseIsland.

::decklist{path=2022/09/15/roseisland}

This list really leans into the true Grixis aspect with an incredibly greedy
manabase. Very cool to see!

#### Grief Doomsday

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Grief
- Ephemerate
:::

Something that sort of falls into the *Tempo* concept but not fully involves the
use of the card :card[Grief]. Grief was explored as a potential interaction
spell following the idea of maximising turn 1 interaction to enable early
Doomsday but, just like in Deadguy Ale lists, it was found to be very effective
when paired with :card[Ephemerate]. This 2 cards combo shreds opposing hands by
causing 3 instances of the Grief discard triggers and leaves you with an
aggressive creature to either block or start pressuring the opponent with.

The lists are less reliant on the creature plan as a joint primary method of
winning and instead use them to help push forwards a slightly later Doomsday
turn. The lists include a higher land count, lower interaction count and use
less of the standard toolbox pile cards but can still try the full plan switch
vs. decks like Delver to remove the combo element.

Here is an example decklist from a 5-0 in July by Monkeyscantcry.

::decklist{path=2022/09/15/monkeyscantcry}

It's an interesting take on the use of a creature plan to support the Doomsday
element of the deck but sometimes falls prey to its own mana requirements.

#### Esper Doomsday

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Teferi, Time Raveler
- Predict
:::

Although we have technically already discussed lists and subarchetypes in the
Esper colours {W}{U}{B}, we haven't properly talked about Esper Doomsday yet.
Esper Doomsday is a much more controlling variant of the archetype that, again
is not new to 2022, but has had a lot of work put into it.

Esper lists tend to be characterised by a high land count, the common use of
:card[Predict] over Ideas Unbound as a draw engine and the use of :card[Teferi,
Time Raveler] as an interaction piece. They aim to run a slower, more
controlling gameplan but are still able to jam an early Ritual into Doomsday if
need be.

Oftentimes the Esper lists will have a transformational sideboard turning them
into pure control decks and using either creature or planeswalker threats like
:card[Jace, the Mindsculptor] or :card[Stoneforge Mystic] to try and
circumnavigate the hate that may be brought in post board for the main Doomsday
plan. As with all the subarchetypes, there is a lot of flexibility available to
any pilots that wish to give this style a go and plenty of toolbox to work with.

Here is an example decklist that recently won the 4 Seasons paper event in Italy
by Dalibor Szegho.

::decklist{path=2022/09/15/dalibor-szegho}

There are some really cool cards in here including the use of :card[Sevinne's
Reclamation] and :card[Entreat the Angels] to help fortify the grind plan.

## Final Thoughts

That just about wraps up the current *year in summary*. Hopefully it has
provided a snapshot glance that allows you to have got a feel for the type of
innovations and discussions that have taken place within the community. As
always do feel free to try things out, ask questions and just generally have fun
tinkering with the best archetype in Legacy (totally not biased).

Until next time, make sure to stay healthy both physically and mentally. The
world is a shit show but at least we can all try and have a nice Dooms-day
together xxxx
