---
authors: d8dk32
banner: BW
kind: ARTICLE
tags: [LEGACY, DDFT]
title: 'DDFT 2022: Year in Review'
---

2022 has been something of a banner year for DDFT. We've seen more published
results of Doomsday x Storm variants than any year in recent memory, and the
deck has not felt this playable since the banning of :card[Sensei's Divining
Top] five years ago. There were also multiple successful variants under the
umbrella of DDFT, and it was this fracturing and the development of the broader
archetype in two substantially different directions that convinced me to write
an article. So to begin this retrospective journey through the year, lets take
you, dear reader, back to... 2021?

## Table of Contents

## 2021

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Echo of Eons
Doomsday
Spoils of the Vault
:::

2021, and 2020 before it, had not been a great year for DDFT. We'd gotten
:card[Echo of Eons] and :card[Thassa's Oracle] a year or two before and the new
tools had provided some fun and interesting decklists but not a ton of results.
I'd been having fun tweaking and playing _Mindkiller Doomsday_, and had cashed
many a league but fallen short of 5-0s. Near the beginning of the year,
_BluStalker_ had a 5-0 with an [interesting Echo DDFT
list](https://www.mtggoldfish.com/deck/3662732#paper). It had some, in my
opinion, questionable card choices and was low on protection spells but it was a
result in the vein of Traditional DDFT. Unfortunately it seemed nobody else had
managed anything. In the twilight hours of 2021, I secured a 5-0 with a new idea
I had been testing, a DDFT list without :card[Burning Wish].

::decklist{path=2022/12/31/no-wish-ddft}

:card[Wishclaw Talisman] plays the role of tutor, and we still had access to a
copy of Echo of Eons. :card[Bolas's Citadel] was a new tool, expensive but
powerful. It functioned similarly to :card[Experimetal Frenzy], which saw its
own share of Doomsday-related success, enabling piles and serving as a Storm
engine in its own right. The manabase in this list was much more stable than in
the 4c builds with Burning Wish that I had been testing. It could play basics,
and still play :card[Orim's Chant] to help protect Echo turns. Trying to build a
15-land manabase that frequently wanted 4 colors on its combo turn and was
trying to go off on turn 3 was causing me problems. Removing a color solved the
issue.

However, despite a solid result quickly after putting the list together, I ended
up not developing the list much more. But keep it in the back of your mind.
We'll come back to some ideas from it later.

## Entering 2022

As we moved into 2022, I was primarily playing and brewing _Mindkiller_
variants. The metagame was (and still is, really) in such a state that I felt
combo decks needed to be extremely fast to compete. There wasn't much room for a
_midrange_ combo deck that wasn't playing :card[Force of Will]. Traditional
DDFT, as well as decks like ANT, fall into this space and ANT was similarly on a
downswing. I think this is in part because there is nothing inherent about the
way the deck is constructed that beats any portion of the metagame. They aren't
fast enough to ignore decks without Force of Will, and they aren't resilient
enough to reliably beat multiple counterspells without playing a bunch of their
own protection. Combine this with the fact that blue decks had become more
inherently constructed to beat typical Storm decks with cards like Narset, and
you have a recipe for pushing out the _midrange_ combo decks. It's much easier
to construct a fast combo deck than one that inherently beats countermagic, and
Mindkiller fits the bill. It even had the tools to play through hateful
permanents when on the draw, though it lacked a bit of the ability to battle
through the blue decks. But I was working on that.

I finally had what I felt was a strong list, and published an
[article](/articles/2022/01/16/the-mindkiller-update) where I tracked and
analyzed my results over 10 leagues. My winrate was over 60% and felt strong,
especially considering I was playing a combo brew with :card[Spoils of the
Vault]. I didn't manage to get any published results in that set of leagues but
I was very happy with the list overall, and it felt much stronger than previous
iterations. The big change that improved the performance was fitting a playset
of :card[Thoughtseize] into the deck. Between it and maindeck :card[Empty the
Warrens], I felt comfortable against blue decks in game 1, and there was no loss
of speed so I could still beat the non-blue decks simply by virtue of deck
construction, while slower hands could simply Thoughtseize them first.

::decklist{path=2022/12/31/mindkiller}

I continued to tweak the list, though changes were minimal, and in the spring I
had something of a hot streak. I had 3 published 5-0s with essentially the above
list, aside from some minor sideboard tweaks. A fourth 5-0 using a fetchland
manabase went unpublished. In between I also had numerous 4-1s, as well as the
occasional stinker league of course, and my winrate was hanging around 75%. The
deck was exactly where I wanted it at the time, and if anyone reading this has
interest in giving it a shot I think that list is a solid starting point.

I wouldn't say I got tired of success or anything, but brewing and playing
interesting decks is one of the primary drivers of me playing Magic, and as the
list settled and I didn't have anything new I wanted to try, I slowed down
playing it. I had a lot of other things going on in life at this point as well;
I was just finishing up a Masters degree, my son was approaching his first
birthday, and it was starting to become grass-touching season anyway. I played a
lot less MTGO during the summer.

## You Said There Were Other DDFT Variants, Stop Talking About Your Spoils Kink

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Bolas's Citadel
Doomsday
Tendrils of Agony
:::

Oh right, sorry.

So around the same time I was on my hot streak, Legacy combo afficionado and
accomplished Doomsday player _Fuz65_ had a small flurry of results with a
radical take on the archetype.

::decklist{path=2022/12/31/citadel-doomsday}

This list is much more akin structurally to the more common Doomsday variant
with a mere 2 colors for a rock solid manabase. Two copies of Bolas's Citadel
provide an alternate engine, and the somewhat disparate halves of the deck are
tied together by a boatload of cantrips. There are some parallels between my
list from the end of 2021, in that the manabase is built for improved stability,
and Citadel provides a powerful engine that is hard for most decks to interact
with.

However, I would say my list was trying harder to be a Storm deck, with the
tutors and multiple tutorable Storm engines. _Fuz_'s list is clearly more
focused on Doomsday, and the Citadels provide a backup plan that incidentally
plays well with the primary plan. There are some aspects of this list that I
don't personally like, such as the distinct lack of tutors. Playing more
cantrips improves your Doomsdays and provides consistency, but I would be
inclined to replace a couple :card[Preordain]s with Wishclaw Talismans, which
can also let you draw into a Doomsday pile and help find Bolas's Citadel, or
find a win-con off Citadel.

That said, the list clearly works, which is interesting because I looks like it
lies firmly in the realm of _midrange_ combo. But lets compare it to decks like
ANT or Traditional DDFT. The biggest difference from Traditional DDFT is the
manabase. Going from 4 to 2 colors and playing lots of basics gives it more
stability against decks like Delver and many of the fair non-blue decks. Good
mana is one of combo's best tools against Delver. Furthermore, Doomsday is one
of the best combo cards against decks that play :card[Thalia, Guardian of
Thraben] or :card[Chalice of the Void], but it has to be backed up by solid mana
(or Force of Will). Storm decks, on the other hand, struggle to beat these kinds
of cards once resolved. And to cap it all off, Citadel can be tough to interact
with. Tradtional anti-Storm cards like :card[Flusterstorm] can't stop it from
resolving, and :card[Prismatic Ending] or other commonly played options can't
remove it. :card[Endurance] does nothing to stop a Tendrils powered by Citadel,
where it can be disruptive to a :card[Past in Flames] deck or a Doomsday pile.

Citadel still functions as a Storm and card-advantage engine under Narset, and
it can't be Pyro- or Hydroblasted. Finally, not playing Burning Wish means a lot
more room in the sideboard for a variety tools against the metagame. I think
these aspects are what allow it to succeed.

## The Rest of the Year, or How I Didnâ€™t Learn to Not Talk About My Spoils Kink

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Galvanic Relay
Doomsday
Mox Opal
:::

As autumn rolled in I'd mostly had my fill of grass-touching and started to more
frequently play Magic. I was still primarily focused on working on _Mindkiller
Doomsday_, and I was especially interested in trying to adapt the deck around
:card[Mox Opal] and :card[Galvanic Relay]. I had seen their effectiveness in TES
and was interested to see if they could do the same for my deck. You'll note
that Relay was already in the sideboard of my 5-0 lists, but I was not
altogether impressed with its power. TES was better optimized to use Relay than
that incarnation of _Mindkiller_, in large part because of the number of mana
rocks. Opals help increase Storm count for a Relay, and then help you cast the
spells you exiled for the next turn. TES is playing around 23 artifacts to help
reach Metalcraft, and Mindkiller was running a mere 12. Conventional wisdom says
that you need a minimum of 18 blue cards to be able to reliably have one to
pitch to Force of Will, and Opal requires you to have 2 more artifacts to use
it. Clearly, simply adding a playset of Opals would leave me far short of the
number of artifacts needed to reliably turn on Metalcraft. Looking at the
artifacts that TES plays that Mindkiller does not, we see :card[Mishra's Bauble]
and Wishclaw Talisman. Both are the kind of cards that are strong if you want to
play multiple turns, which isn't really something Mindkiller was trying to do.
So I had to figure out what additional artifacts to slot in, as well as what to
cut to fit them.

My first attempts swapped the Thoughtseizes for :card[Defense Grid]s, and I
trimmed on lands and :card[Cabal Ritual] to fit the Moxen. This made sense on
paper, since you're not cutting any protection spells, and Grid is arguably
better than Thoughtseize at protecting Echo turns. Part of the draw of Opal in
the first place was making Echoes better by helping to generate mana from the
new hand, so it seemed like Grid was a natural fit to this plan. But there were
some issues: Defense Grid costs 2 mana, and Opal can't help cast it if you're
relying on it to hit Metalcraft. This made it actaully quite awkward and the
deck felt slower as a result, and it still only left me with 20 artifacts which
is a little lower than I wanted.

It took me a little while but I realized the artifact lands were the most
natural solution to my problem. I wouldn't need to cut any actual spells, and
the Opals would hopefully mitigate any color issues stemming from my lands only
making one color. I snagged a few 4-1s with a list that looked like this:

::decklist{path=2022/12/31/mindkiller.opal}

It felt strong against most decks, and Echoes felt like they led more
consistently to kills due to additional free mana sources. The Relays were
definitely more powerful than they were without Opal. Still, there were some
aspects that I wasn't a fan of. The list felt more susceptible to :card[Chalice
of the Void], :card[Force of Vigor] became a much bigger problem, and
:card[Collector Ouphe] was quite literally unbeatable. The deck was still fast
enough to go under those cards some of the time, but matchups that previously
felt favorable now felt much more even. There also were some issues with
mulligans, primarily due to the manabase. The Opals were dead if the hand
couldn't achieve Metalcraft, and more commonly lands would make the wrong color.
The Thoughtseizes also felt a bit out of place now, as there was less excess
black mana being created. Futhermore, it somehow felt like the deck was
constructed such that casting Thoughtseize on turn 1 and going off turn 2 was
less desirable as a gameplan. I think it was a result of the lands not making
all colors. A hand that could play land into Thoughtseize on turn 1 might no be
able to make red mana for turn 2. In spite off all this, I felt like Opals could
still be a net gain (and my results without Opal were uninspiring), so I
continued testing.

## Where Do We Go From Here?

This is the _Mindkiller_ list I am currently testing and I like it quite a bit.

::decklist{path=2022/12/31/mindkiller.opal-v2}

The biggest change to the list is moving the Relays to the main, and discard to
the board. This maximizes the business spells and the power of Opal in game 1.
We're leaning into the speed axis. It doesn't noticeably impact gameplay against
blue decks, because Storm spells from hand have always been the best weapon
against them, and Relay helps overpower them. Relay can be a liability against
prison-style decks but this is an acceptable loss; there are only 3 copies of
Relay maindeck, and in the blind you'd rather Spoils or Wish for Empty or Echo,
so it doesn't materially change the matchup. Collector Ouphe is still clearly a
major issue, but I came to realize that speed is the best weapon against it
anyway. It rarely lands on turn 1, so on the play a big Relay can be sufficient
to get under it. Postboard against most decks that would play it, Relay comes
out.

You'll notice that I swapped Thoughtseize for Duress as my discard of choice.
I'm not 100% convinced this is correct but most of what you want to discard is
non-creature, and against the decks with creatures you'd care to discard, like
Thalia, you'd rather just go fast and not spend time with discard spells. Not
losing life to your manabase or other spells means you can see the most possible
cards with Spoils, which is a minor, but cetainly non-zero, advantage. Finally,
I also removed :card[Street Wraith]. It was really only in the deck to enable a
very specific pile. Imagine a hand like this:

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Doomsday
Dark Ritual
Lotus Petal
Lion's Eye Diamond
:::

This is a keepable 4-card hand with Street Wraith in the deck, since you can put
Wraith at the top of the pile and use LED mana to cast :card[Manamorphose]s into
Oracle. But it's an extremely specific situation, I couldn't remember the last
time it came up, and Wraith mostly was just 2 life for a random card. With the
new focus on powering up Relay, it makes sense to remove the worst relay hit
from the deck when it wasn't a great card to begin with.

The last thing to mention is that this list is missing a few sideboard cards. I
simply couldn't decide what I wanted to put in there. The boarding maps well as
is, and all the reasonable win-cons and utility cards are already present.
Perhaps :card[Slaughter Pact] would be a reasonable inclusion as a way to kill
Collector Ouphe and other hatebears.

Coming into 2023, I would also really like to work on the _Fuz65_-style list
some more as well. It's been a while since I've seriously played a deck with
blue cantrips, and I'd hate to leave a viable DDFT list untested. I'd also
really like to play more paper Magic, especially larger tournaments. Haven't had
a good MTG road trip with the homies in far too long.

Finally, to wrap this up, I wanted to shout out a couple people from the
Doomsday discord that are active in the DDFT channel. _Jens_ has been continuing
to work on Traditional DDFT lists, and while they've expressed that it hasn't
been all that successful, it's still good to see people developing and testing
in the DDFT space. _Prosokken_ is a real sicko and _Mindkiller_ enjoyer, who has
listened to a lot of outlandish crap ideas from me and was very helpful in
converging on the _Mindkiller_ list I'm currently testing. And of course
_Fuz65_; innovation is always appreciated.

If you made it this far, thanks for reading, and hopefully 2023 will bring some
new toys to play with.
