---
authors: Doishy
banner: /banners/brainstorm.mmq.jpg
title: "Gangster Trippin' - Cantrip Discipline in Doomsday (and Legacy in general)"
---

Everyone who has forayed into Legacy will know that the blue *xerox* shell is
very prevalent within the format. The shell follows the school of thought that
uses cheap, draw a card, effects (colloquial known as cantrips) to enable
sculpting of your hand and finding answers when needed. There have already been
a number of articles that explore these theories by well known personalities
such as Reid Duke, AJ Sacher and Tomas Mar.

- [Reid's Guide to Legacy: Using Cantrips Properly][cfb.cantrip-guide]
- [Fishing Lessons: Pondering Brainstorm][scg.fishing-lesson]
- [Everything about four colour control][snapcardster.four-color-control]

[cfb.cantrip-guide]: https://www.channelfireball.com/all-strategy/articles/reids-guide-to-legacy-using-cantrips-properly/
[scg.fishing-lesson]: https://articles.starcitygames.com/premium/fishing-lessons-pondering-brainstorm/
[snapcardster.four-color-control]: https://snapcardster.com/blog/everything-about-four-color-control/

*Please note: the Snapcardster site is no longer running and therefore the link
will not function, there are Reddit and The Source threads which can be found
discussing the key points of the article [here][reddit.ponder-vs-preordain] and
[here][mtgthesource.ponder-vs-preordain] respectively.*

[reddit.ponder-vs-preordain]: https://www.reddit.com/r/MTGLegacy/comments/83w1ug/preordain_vs_ponder/
[mtgthesource.ponder-vs-preordain]: http://www.mtgthesource.com/forums/showthread.php?32319-Ponder-vs-Preordain

It was these articles and a question from Doomsday Discord members *Wally* and
*Dale Cooper* that led to the inspiration to author this. Referring back to the
concept of the *Xerox* shell, Doomsday is a prime example of this in terms of
deck construction. In fact, Meandeck Doomsday potentially boasts the highest
number of cantrips of any given archetype in Legacy running up to a total of 18
replacement card draw effects within the main deck alone.

In this article we hope to present the following points:

- A summary of the cantrips and their purpose
- The general principles of cantrip sequencing
- Doomsday specific principles of cantrip sequencing
- Discussion of example scenarios

## A Summary of the Cantrips Involved

### Legacy Staples

The first suite of cantrips are what would be considered the *standard* Legacy
setup. Ponder and Brainstorm can be found of as 4-ofs in most {U} based decks
and Preordain as a 2-4 of in many as well.

#### :card[Ponder]

Ponder is powerful tool that allows you to see 4 cards during resolution. It is
at its most powerful when paired with a fetchland as this gives you the option
to take the best card of the first three observed and shuffle away any potential
unwanted pieces with the fetchland. Ponder is best suited for trying to find one
specific card which, for our intents and purposes, is normally Dark Ritual,
Doomsday or a protection spell like Force of Will.

<row variant="centered">{{!Pnd}}</row>

#### :card[Preordain]

Preordain is normally considered the *weakest* of the classic suite. Previously
it has normally been relegated to combo decks who just wanted additional
filtering to find key pieces but is generally considered weaker than Ponder as
it sees 1 fewer cards. This point is in direct contradiction to the wording
presented in Reid's article.

> Preordain is ideal for digging to particular cards. This is why you see
> Preordain often in combo decks, but less often in fair decks like Delver or
> Snow. Like Brainstorm, Preordain gets more powerful as the game goes deeper,
> since you’ll have a clearer picture of what cards you’re looking for.

I think the intent of the words is the same but the way they are presented
implies the opposite of the truth.

<row variant="centered">{{!Pre}}</row>

#### :card[Brainstorm]

Brainstorm has been described as a [*Pillar of the
Format*](https://twitter.com/mtgaaron/status/985674571188588544) and is
considered one of the most powerful spell effects in Legacy. It acts as a way to
*see* 3 cards but can, in effect, give the ability to exchange up to 2 cards
from your hand, normally those considered uneeded at the time, and get rid of
them, again normally with the aid of a fetchland. This in a sense can be viewed
as almost drawing 3 cards with some people comparing it to :card[Ancestral Recall].

<row variant="centered">{{!BS}}</row>

### Free *Cycling Effects*

This next pair are mostly unique to Doomsday however :card[Death's Shadow] based
decks (and some Dredge decks) will also make use of one of them. These are
*free* cycling cards that have little to no relevant text outside of their
cycling abilities (other than some specific circumstances). Their use is almost
always to provide a {0} mana draw effect after Doomsday has resolved.

#### :card[Street Wraith]

Street Wraith is used by Shadow decks to both thin out their draws and to reduce
their life total aggressively. For Doomsday it is a way to enable a lot of the
piles made with the added benefit of being a draw effect that is immune to
normal countermagic. The main downside of Street Wraith is the fact that, post
Doomsday, your life total can be taxed quite heavily so having to rely on paying
2 or 4 life can be pretty punishing. Unlike Edge of Autumn however it can be
used even if you have played an aggressive hand via Lotus Petals or if you need
to retain a land to return with Daze for example.

In some circumstances, it can be used as an additional win condition. Casting a
Street Wraith after your Doomsdays have been hit with a :card[Surgical Extraction]
effects or your opponent has paid 16 life with :card[Sylvan Library] can be a
legitimate way to win the game. Against {B}{R} Reanimator there is also the
potential to cycle it in response to an :card[Exhume] whereby, thanks to the life
paid to a :card[Griselbrand] and the Swampwalk it can often present a lethal clock
out of nowhere.

For an excellent example of Street Wraith as a win condition please watch [this
video](https://youtu.be/Eyi_R7QZiAc?t=2673) by Nevilshute against {U}{B} Shadow.

<row variant="centered">{{!SW}}</row>

#### :card[Edge of Autumn]

Edge of Autumn provides a method of cycling that is less taxing on your life
total however can be of much less use outside of the combo. Sacrificing a land
can be a heavy costs however sometimes it does mean you can mitigate the
downside of a :card[Wasteland] effect or similar by cycling in response. In a pinch
you can also use it to retrieve the third {B} source in the form of the basic
Swamp from the deck but the situations this is needed are far and few between.

The thought process behind it mirrors that of the discard suite utilised. Edge
is effectively the equivalent of :card[Duress]. Although Duress is generally more
narrow than :card[Thoughtseize] in effect, the life loss can be significant so a
mix is run to provide maximum flexibility.

<row variant="centered">{{!EoA}}</row>

### Pile Enablers

The next pair are not cantrips in the traditional sense as they are more
designed to provide raw card advantage in their use. Just like with the cycling
cards, they tend to be considered primarily for their use within Doomsday piles
however they can have usage outside of this to varying degrees. One is a well
known staple for certain builds of Miracles and the other is a historical card
from pre- :card[Sensei's Divining Top] ban DDFT days.

### :card[Predict]

Predict pairs effectively with other cantrips as you can use it to provide
additional filtering and raw card advantage. It also enables access to Doomsday
piles where you cannot make {U}{U} to dig into the pile with. You can make use
of effects like the reveal triggers on :card[Delver of Secrets] or
:card[Counterbalance] to gain advantage from your opponent's deck and, in the
mirror, it can even disrupt opposing Doomsday piles either milling a key
component or causing the pilot to inadvertently draw themselves to death.

<row variant="centered">{{!Pdt}}</row>

### :card[Ideas Unbound]

Ideas Unbound is a more effective card (resources allowing) during pile
construction but a weaker card outside of the combo. It can be used as a large
scale :card[Faithless Looting] effect to turn a land heavy hand into a speall heavy
hand. or provide an explosive boost of cards for a single turn, potentially
enabling you to combo off there and then.

<row variant="centered">{{!IU}}</row>

## Cantrip Sequencing - General Principles

Normally, when playing a *fair* Legacy deck, you need to filter through your
deck in order to find the balance of threats, protection and disruption
depending on the situation. In a combo deck, this is normally a bit more
hyper-focussed to find the piece/pieces in order to *go off* as quickly as
possible. More often in combo decks you will find yourself shuffling off of
Ponders or *bottoming 2* off Preordains in order to find what is needed. The
following guidelines are only that, general guidelines. As with anything in life
there are always possible exceptions or circumstances where an alternative set
of ideas are more valid than those presented here so they should not taken as
gospel truth.

In general, with your cantrips, you want to try and maximise the amount of cards
you see. This gives you the most information to help you make the most informed
decision you can in your gameplay actions. If presented with a turn one hand
with a single Island, and presented with a choice of leading with a Ponder or
Preordain generally it would be better to lead on the latter. This is because
the Preordain will let you see up to 3 cards initially and, if a fetchland is
found in those 3 and / or the card drawn for your subsequent turn, it will
improve the Ponder used.

If you have both and 2 non-fetchlands to cast them with then it is once again
better to lead with Preordain. This allows you to see up to 7 cards between the
2 of them. If you have 1 fetchland and 1 non-fetchland then it is better to lead
on the Ponder, fetch, then (if desired) play the Preordain. You may not wish to
retain all the cards seen from Ponder on the top of your deck and so want the
option to shuffle them away. You also don't wish to cast the Preordain to
potentially scry 2 cards to the bottom of your deck that are unwanted to then
shuffle them back to the top. This is also why it can be beneficial to crack any
fetches in play prior to casting Preordain.

You should always try and cast Brainstorm in conjucture with a fetchland. With
this in mind it should rarely be cast on turn 1. The main times this is
acceptable are scenarios such as when trying to protect a card in hand from
opposing targeted discard or, if your hand is one (common) piece away from a
deterministic win, and you think that you are able to find that piece through an
end-of-turn Brainstorm. Often though it is still worth not casting it so early
in the game.

If you are trying to dig hard to find one particular card, perhaps in a
desperation scenario, it might be worth leaving a Brainstorm to be the last
cantrip you play. This is because after resolving any Ponders and/or Preordains
you have, the Brainstorm cannot *clear the top* of your library so, although it
can see 3 cards, it will not be able to have you view any new ones in isolation.
In non-desperation scenarioes it may be better to Brainstorm and then use the
scry 2 from Preordain or the shuffle from Ponder to act as a fetchland shuffle
however this is generally inefficient in terms of card usage.

## Cantrip Sequencing - Doomsday Principles (pre-combo)

### Brainstorm Retention

In Doomsday there are a few considerations to make that can sometimes go against
what is considered *normal sequencing*. One example is the use (or non-use) of
Brainstorm. We know that Brainstorm, in conjecture with an additional card in
hand post-Doomsday resolving, can lead to a deterministic, same-turn win. Let's
consider the following hand:

<row variant="hand">{{!DR}} {{!Pnd}} {{!FoW}} {{!FoW}} {{!S|RAV}} {{!BS}} {{!Pre}}</row>

In this scenario we have 2 lands in play, Underground Sea and a Polluted Delta.

<row variant="hand">{{!Underground Sea}} {{!Polluted Delta}}</row>

It is turn 3.

Normally we would expect, in order to maximise the cards *seen* this turn, to
lead with Brainstorm off of Underground Sea to then fetch away what we get rid
of and assume we will be casting Preordain next, maybe Ponder. One thing to
consider though, as we are looking for the Doomsday, is that if we find one, we
can win the game this turn with Brainstorm. As a result, what might be a better
option is to lead on Ponder. This gives us the maximum amount of cards seen for
our mana and leaves us with the option to keep one card and shuffle away the
rest.

If we fail to find a Doomsday with the Ponder we have the option to fetch and
use the Preordain to try again. If our life total is not under pressure then we
can play Swamp and cast Dark Ritual and Doomsday this turn. If it is we can play
Swamp and pass the turn looking to hit the win on the next. Obviously the
matchup and circumstance plays a large role in what sequence or line to work
towards but it does mean there are additional considerations to be made before
playing an *optimal* Brainstorm.

### Cantrip Retention

Similar to the point above, quite often the scenario comes up whereby you have
Doomsday in hand plus the means to cast it but no way to *dig* into the pile. If
the opponent has pressure on board, this could mean you are unable to cast
Doomsday until you find some sort of cantrip. Sometimes this situation comes up
from poor variance but other times it can be from a misuse of cantrips and an
overly aggressive use of them to find the combo / mana pieces.

When working out what you need to win you of course need to note the relative
pressure you are under from your opponent. Do you need to cast a Ponder this
turn or can it wait until the next? One of the hardest lessons to learn in
Legacy is probably when it is fine to play a land and simply say "go". If you
are playing against a {U} based control deck, often they will not be able to
place any pressure on the board until the later turns or if they do, it is often
only something like an {{Ice-Fanged Coatl}}. Being chipped away for 1 a turn is
fine as it gives you a lot of time to work with so don't feel like you have to
use all your mana every turn. This same principle applies to facing against
:card[Daze] decks like Delver. It's okay to take a turn or two and simply develop
your mana without allowing them to trade 1:1 with your cantrips.

Often you might find a situation where you have a pair of cantrips in hand and
just need to find a single remaining piece to combo off, perhaps a ritual,
Doomsday or protection spell. Depending on what combination of cantrips is in
hand, can be crucial in balancing what is best for finding the missing piece and
also which is best for accessing the pile. As is alluded to in the [meandeck
interactions](chapters/meandeck/interactions) chapter, there can be crucial
benefits to favouring one cantrip over another. In a vacuum, Brainstorm is
likely the most favourable cantrip to retain. It enables the most mana efficient
same turn win piles and, without a fetchland to pair with, can cause you to
become locked when searching for the final piece.

If picking between Ponder and Preordain, Ponder is obviously favourable to be
able to see more cards than Preordain can to maximise the chance of finding the
final piece required. Preordain is also more favourable in playing around
shuffle effects like Surgical Extraction. The table below, taken from the
interactions chapter, shows the calculated probability of successfully hitting
the desired card first within a pile. As can be observed, Preordain gives the
most favourable success rate of building a standard same turn win pile.

|                | Street Wraith | Ponder | Brainstorm | Preordain |
| :------------: | :-----------: | :----: | :--------: | :-------: |
| Ignore Removal | 25%           | 70%    | 60%        | 70%       |
| Beat Removal   | 20%           | 53%    | 45%        | 66%       |

### Cycling

In terms of cantrip retention the best ones to keep back, when allowed, are the
free cycling cards; Wraith and Edge. They provide the most mana efficient method
to draw into a pile post-Doomsday resolving. As with everything however, this
may not always be the case and sometimes using a cycler prior to being in a
position to combo can be advantageous.

If you have a dual land in play and an Edge of Autumn in hand and your opponent
activates Wasteland, targeting your dual, you can obtain value by cycling the
Edge, sacrificing the dual land being targeted, to draw a card. If you are only
one card away from having the win, this might not be worth doing, especially if
you know the top cards of your library.

The cyclers can also be used to improve the use of setup cards like
{{Lim-Dûl's Vault}} by enabling mana efficient ways of drawing the cards tutored
for within the same turn. You can also use them to access *hidden* cards on the
top of your deck. Hiding a Force of Will or a Daze on the top of your deck, with
a Street Wraith in hand, means you can potentially dodge it getting hit by a
card like Duress. This particular trick shouldn't be used often as it normally
results in card disadvantage but it is something to be mindful of.

### Getting Value from Predict

One card that you can easily gain advantage from is Predict. Predict allows you
to naturally jump ahead in cards which, in grindy matchups, can be pivotal.
Often, thanks to the deck manipulation of other cards within the list, you can
find a window where you know the top of your deck in order to correctly name it
with Predict. This isn't always the case however and it is common to fall into
traps of misusing your cantrips in order to setup Predict. Additionally, Predict
is often the last cantrip you leave in your hand when searching for something. A
hand of Brainstorm, Fetchland, Ponder, Preordain and Predict will likely start
with Brainstorm into Fetch, shuffle, Preordain then Ponder. Assuming you shuffle
from the Ponder you are left with no knowledge to extract value from the Predict
with.

You can get value from Predict by targeting an opponent. Cards like Delver of
Secrets or Counterbalance, as mentioned earlier, will cause the opponent to
reveal the top of their deck to you. You can then target them, naming the card,
to extract the Predict value. You can also try this, assuming you have no better
option, after the opponent resolves a Brainstorm (assuming you knew their hand
prior through discard) or, specifically in the Doomsday mirror, after they have
resolved a Doomsday. You will need to be wary of trying to do this. Cards like
Veil of Summer and :card[Leyline of Sanctity] can prevent you targeting the
opponent and effects that shuffle decks like fetch lands or Surgical Extraction
can be used to remove potential advantage from using Predict.

### Looting with Ideas Unbound

Many see Ideas Unbound as a purely *combo-centric* card wit very limited utility
prior to the casting of Doomsday. There are two main methods of using it outside
of inside piles; *filtering* and *card booming*. Filtering basically is the use
of it as a glorified :card[Careful Study]. If you find yourself with a hand of too
many lands, or an abundance of protection in a matchup where it's not needed,
you can just cast Ideas Unbound to spend the turn drawing some extra gas and
discarding the uneeded cards.

The other option is more of a late game tactic whereby you use it effectively as
an :card[Ancestral Recall]. If you are low on cards, close to having a winning
hand, in a bit of a dire strait and have a decent amount of excess mana you can
use it to draw 3 cards to try and hit some business spells. Often you can be
able to find Doomsday and the mana to cast it, or spells to protect it, and
resolve a win in the same turn, thus avoiding the discard clause, or creating a
pass the turn pile whereby discarding your hand becomes a non-issue.

## Example Scenarios

We shall now present a couple of example scenarios involving cantrip decisions
taken from real-life situations observed. The scenario will be given and a
question asked about a decision point. The potential answers will then be
discussed. As with any situation, there may not be an objectively correct
solution but hopefully they will be thought provoking enough to allow you to be
able to identify alternative, non-intuitive lines in future games you might
play.

### Scenario 1 - Edge of Autumn vs. Wasteland

We're playing against {U}{B} Shadow. It is a few turns in and we have cantripped
to find a Doomsday on top of the deck with Ponder. As we fear Thoughtseize from
their hand we decide to leave Doomsday on top and draw a land in order to
protect it. We pass the turn and our opponent plays a Wasteland and fires it off
targeting our tapped Underground Sea.

Our board is:

<row variant="hand">{{!Underground Sea}} {{!Polluted Delta}}</row>

Our hand is:

<row variant="hand">{{!DR}} {{!EoA}} {{!FoW}} {{!FoW}} {{!Underground Sea}} {{!BS}} {{!Daze}}</row>

What's the play?

We have a couple of options here. First is to fetch, cast Brainstorm and hope
they try and interact with it so we can "save" our land by returning it with
Daze. This is a poor choice and one that is not recommended no matter how
"clever" it might feel. The second is to cycle Edge of Autumn, sacrificing the
Sea to draw the known Doomsday thus obtaining *value* from their Wasteland
activation. This is often a good play however in this instance it may not be
optimal. The third option is just allow the Wasteland to resolve without a
response. If we draw the Doomsday next turn we have the ability to cast it off
of the Dark Ritual, with Force of Will and/or Daze backup along with mana to pay
for Daze or the ability to make a "perfect" Brainstorm pile with Cavern of Souls
included. In this instance it is probably optimal to go with the third option
which gives you the most flexibility.

### Scenario 2 - Last Resorts

We're playing against a Depths deck that has the active Stage x Depths ready on
the field. It is game 1 so we gave no way to combat an on board Marit Lage. We
have an almost ready hand and some cantrips so we have an out, we just need to
try and sequence everything into a win. We enter turn 3 with the following board
state and hand:

Our board is:

<row variant="hand">{{!Underground Sea}} {{!Underground Sea}}</row>

Our hand is:

<row variant="hand">{{!DR}} {{!SW}} {{!Pre}} {{!Pnd}} {{!Daze}} {{!BS}} {{!Scalding Tarn}}</row>

What's the play?

Looking at our hand we can see that the only piece we are missing for a win is
the Doomsday itself. We have a plethora of potential cantrip options to make use
of so we need to ensure we maximise their potential to give us the best chance
of finding what we need. We have the potential to become slightly constrained on
mana however if we can find it within 2 of our single mana cantrips then we can
still win this turn. The key here is to recognise what are the minimum
requirements for a winning hand with what we have. Given the hand above, we can
win so long as we have a {B} for Dark Ritual and both the Street Wraith and
Brainstorm in hand. Given this information we can sequence by playing Tarn,
fetching, playing Preordain followed by playing Ponder. This potential for 7
looks should give around a 46% chance of finding one of our four copies of
Doomsday. Any cards seen / drawn with the two cantrips such as an additional
Street Wraith or Edge of Autumn or Lotus Petal can help change the odds or give
additional options but, in a vacuum, this is likely the best sequence to take.

### Scenario 3 - Cast or Cycle?

We're playing against TES on the play. We've managed to find a Doomsday however
we have not managed to find a ritual or a third {B} mana source as we enter
turn 2. Our opponent has just cantripped turn 1 and passed.

Our board is:

<row variant="hand">{{!Underground Sea}}</row>

Our hand is:

<row variant="hand">{{!Daze}} {{!Island}} {{!Pre}} {{!DD}} {{!Dur}} {{!EoA}} {{!Misty Rainforest}}</row>

What's the play?

We have a couple of options here. The Daze gives us a little bit of flexibility
in terms of protection however given how much artifact mana TES runs currently,
it is very likely to be obsoleted if not paired with additional protection. One
option to consider is to play Misty and fetch for Bayou to then cast Edge of
Autumn. This allows us to guarantee finding our basic Swamp ready to have
{U}{B}{B}{B} available on our next turn. This does leave us a little vulnerable
however as even then we would not be able to win on the same turn we Doomsday
without picking up a Brainstorm and we could not cast our Duress on either turn
without finding a 4th {B} source. If we play Misty and fetch another Sea
however, we can preordain to try and find a Dark Ritual or B source and cast
Duress in the same turn. This helps delay the opponent and gives a higher upside
as, if we find the Dark Ritual, we can perform a deterministic turn 3 win with
Edge cycling into Brainstorm pile.

## Closing Thoughts

As always a wordy read so thank you for taking the time to work through it. I
hope the article was enjoyable. It's a tricky subject to broach as there is
already so many good resources covering the art of cantripping with the basics
such as pair fetches with Brainstorm or fetch before you Preordain however I
wanted to try and capture some of the non-intuitive thinking that can be
associated with playing Meandeck Doomsday.

I would like to give a shout of thanks to Nevilshute who helped review this as I
wrote it. He does a lot of great video content so please do check [his
videos](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC96xkSiGHqjAa_dfnf46NtQ) out on youtube
if you want to see the deck in action.

As always if you want even more content please check out our
[resources](/appendices/resources/) page which includes a list of community
streamers or maybe if you are up for a challenge maybe check out the
[puzzles](/puzzles/) page.

If you would like to submit any content to the Wiki then please contact
AngryBacon in the [Doomsday Discord](https://discord.gg/vajvFXt) or contact
Doishy on the Discord if you wish to discuss anything mentioned in the article
further.

Until next time.

Please stay safe, well and punish people for playing non-blue decks.  
xxx
