---
authors: Otterlady, Doishy
title: Deck Construction Principles
---

## Table of Contents

## Preamble

Because of how flexible and versatile the Doomsday shell is, and how relatively
compact the combo can be, there is a lot of potential variance to be found in
terms of deck construction. Because of this, combined with individual pilot
preferences, metagame shifts, new printings, meta changes and general brewing,
it is almost impossible to simply list a *default deck* to start from and try
online or at a local event. If you do wish to find a decklist to start with,
consider checking out the `#decklists-archive` channel in the [Doomsday
Discord][discord] for the most recent successful lists people are trying out.

Because of this, in this chapter instead of presenting just a decklist and
explaining the card choices in it, we will instead try to discuss the
construction of the deck from the ground up, explore what changing different
elements or ratios of card choices can do and hopefully give you an idea of how
you might wish to tailor the shell to your own individual playstyle.

We will start by exploring the main card groups which are incorporated into the
archtype and then look to explore what considerations are made when putting them
together.

## Doomsday's

### Tutors

The namesake of the deck, :card[Doomsday] is a requirement in all variants of
the archetype. You will always need to have access to this as a four of in any
dedicated build played. As you will need to access and resolve one of these in
order to win the game in 99% of cases, often it is advantageous to try and
increase the number being played. Because of deck construction rules limitations
in Legacy, this means running other cards to try and locate more copies of
Doomsday.

The two most common examples are :card[Personal Tutor] (PT) and :card[Lim-Dul's
Vault] (LDV). Both of these are card disadvantage but allow you to locate a copy
of Doomsday and place it on top of your deck. Personal Tutor is more favoured
for faster style lists costing only {U} and is good for setting up earlier combo
turns whilst LDV is slower but has more flexibility by avoiding :card[Chalice of
the Void] set to X = 1, being an Instant and being able to *tutor* for cards
other than Sorceries.

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- DD
- PT
- Lim-Dul's Vault
- Solve the Equation
- BW
:::

Another option, albeit a slower one again is :card[Solve the Equation]. This
costs {2}{U} but allows you to place the Doomsday, or other target, directly
into your hand. It can be favourable for lists that either want access to a more
toolbox approach to some of the deckbuilding choices or a slower, more
controlling one. There are many other options that could be considered like
:card[Burning Wish], :card[Profane Tutor] or :card[Spoils of the Vault] however
the majority of these have been found to not be effective.

### Deckbuilding Ratios

In terms of deckbuilding ratios. You should have at a minimum four copies of
Doomsday. If you prefer a slower, more control-esque style of play then you
don't need to have any more as you should naturally find them through your other
cantrips and general desired length of play. If you want a balanced style list
then you should look to have around six copies of Doomsday (four Doomsday and
two tutors). If you want a faster build then you want to aim for seven to eight
copies of Doomsday (four Doomsday and three to four tutors). For faster builds
the cheaper mana cost tutors are favourable whilst for slower ones the more
expensive may be better options.

If you want to increase the number of copies of Doomsday through the use of
tutors, these often replace cantrip slots with numbers of :card[Preordain] and
numbers of tutors balancing out. This isn't always the case but is the general
rule of thumb. You could also consider decreasing interaction as some tutors can
act as additional copies of those as well.

## Lands

### Land Choices

As with the majority of the decks in Legacy, or Magic in general, lands are
required in order to be able to cast your spells. Doomsday tends to be a deck
centered around the {U}{B} colour pairing with occasionally secondary and
tertiary splash colours being integrated in. The deck runs a fetchland manabase
normally consisting of four copies of :card[Polluted Delta] and four to five
additional *off-colour* fetches. The *off-colour* fetches tend to be the {U}
based splash fetch (where a splash is applicable) as the majority with
ocassional incorporation of the {B} based splash fetch.

For example: In a Grixis {U}{B}{R} based Doomsday list you might elect to run
four :card[Polluted Delta], three :card[Scalding Tarn] and one
:card[Bloodstained Mire] as your fetchlands of choice.

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Polluted Delta
- Scalding Tarn
- Bloodstained Mire
:::

An eight fetchland configuration is not required with some people opting for
running nine with a reduced mana-producing land count. Additionally for more
controlling builds, some may elect to replace some of these with copies of
:card[Prismatic Vista] in conjunction with an increased basic lands count
however these are considered not as effective as other fetchlands.

In terms of fetchable lands, :card[Underground Sea] is the dominant dual land
used. For most straight {U}{B} lists this is a four-of that is run however for
less aggressive lists or lists with splash colours in this can often be a three
of. Some very aggressive lists which have started to forgo basic lands entirely
are option to run four Seas and a copy of :card[Watery Grave] as a pseudo fifth
copy. In this instance, if no basic lands are being run, the fetchland
configuration can be changed to run any combination of {U}/x or {B}/x
fetchlands. Diversification is important to avoid :card[Pithing Needle] type
effects. Conversely, in a more control-based list this can drop down as far as
only one or two copies of Underground Sea with an Island dominant manabase being
favoured with copies of :card[Urborg, Tomb of Yawgmoth] being run as a mana
fixer of choice.

If splash colours are being run then it is generally accepted to run one {U}/x
dual land of the splash colour and one {B}/x dual land of the splash colour but
again you can elect to only run one splash dual with the {U}/X being favoured.

For example: In a BUG {U}{B}{G} based Doomsday list you might elect to run three
Underground Seas, one :card[Tropical Island] and one :card[Bayou] as your dual
lands of choice.

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Underground Sea
- Tropical Island
- Bayou
:::

The final land type to discuss (for this section) is your basic land count.
Traditionally only two to three basics were run normally in a 2-1 ratio of
Island to Swamp. More recently though some are opting to run only one of each,
some only the Island and others (as mentioned above) are opting to run no basic
lands at all. If you want to opt for a more control style build then you will
probably need to look to increase your basic land count to four or five.
Normally you wouldn't consider running a splash basic such as a mountain or
forest however in the heavier control builds it might be worthwhile.

For example: In an Esper {W}{U}{B} control based Doomsday list you might elect
to run two Islands, two Swamps and one Plains as your basic lands of choice.

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Island|RAV
- Swamp|RAV
- Plains|RAV
:::

### Deckbuilding Ratios

The majority of Doomsday lists like to run between fourteen and seventeen lands
as part of their core manabase. The number tends to decrease with a more
aggressive playstyle and an increased number of free cycle effects and
:card[Lotus Petal]s. It is normally split as eight fetch lands, two basics and
five dual lands with numbers changing based on your preference and playstyle.
You can supplement your land count with other toolbox lands like :card[Cavern of
Souls] or :card[Shelldock Isle] however these will be discussed later as part of
the Pile Cards section and should not be considered as part of your mana
producing land count. Some people also opt to use other toolbox lands like
:card[Wasteland] in their lists in an effort to be more disruptive. Again this
should not factor as part of your mana requirements and instead be considered as
interaction.

Let's consider some example mana bases for different styles of play for the
deck. We shall present an aggressive, straight {U}{B} *Turbo* manabase, a more
balanced Grixis {U}{B}{R} manabase and a control style Esper {W}{U}{B} manabase.

#### {U}{B} Turbo

- 2 Polluted Delta
- 2 Flooded Strand
- 2 Scalding Tarn
- 2 Misty Rainforest
- 4 Underground Sea
- 1 Watery Grave
- 1 Island

If you were to run a splash colour you could replace the Island with the {U}/x
dual land of the appropriate type here.

#### {U}{B}{R} Balanced

- 4 Polluted Delta
- 3 Scalding Tarn
- 1 Bloodstained Mire
- 3 Underground Sea
- 1 Volcanic Island
- 1 Badlands
- 1 Island
- 1 Swamp

You can consider swapping basics for additional fetches if you want to be a
little less resilient vs Wasteland or :card[Blood Moon] effects. Inversely you
can also go down to three Seas to add an additional basic land if desired.

#### {W}{U}{B} Control

- 4 Polluted Delta
- 4 Flooded Strand
- 2 Underground Sea
- 1 Tundra
- 1 Scrubland
- 1 Plains
- 2 Island
- 1 Swamp
- 1 Urborg, Tomb of Yawgmoth

Once again you can play around with numbers of different fetchlands, duals and
basics to find a ratio that fits your playing style preferences.

## Mana Acceleration

### Accelerant Choices

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- DR
- LP
- CR
:::

Because Legacy can be a very fast and efficient format, additional help is
needed in order to facilitate casting a spell which costs {B}{B}{B}. One
advantage of the deck is the speed with which you can deploy a Doomsday to the
stack, hopefully outracing any pressure that is on the board or avoiding your
opponent being able to obtain interaction in hand or the mana resources to use
it. To facilitate this we use a few cards that temporarily accelerate our mana.

The core ones played are :card[Dark Ritual] and Lotus Petal. Dark Ritual is a
key tool which conveniently, on resolution, produces the exact mana required to
cast Doomsday. It allows you to be able to aggressively fetch basic Islands and
still have {B}{B}{B} and it can even enable you to cast Doomsday on turn one of
the game. You should almost always be running four copies of Dark Ritual.

Lotus Petal is both a mana accelerant that helps cast your spells and can be
easily incorporated effectively in your piles. It helps fix your mana to enable
you to pivot from cantripping to casting Doomsday and can also facilitate a turn
one or turn two Doomsday though not as effectively as Dark Ritual does. The
number of Lotus Petals increase as number of lands decreases and higher counts
are favourable for either decks looking to win fast or that have greedier mana
requirements due to splash colours. In a control style list you may only wish to
run two whilst most other lists will probably wish to run three or four.

Some people opt for additional acceleration in the form of a singleton
:card[Cabal Ritual]. This is simply a way to ensure you have more consistent
access to {B}{B}{B} and is generally just a way to jump from two mana to three
mana. The Threshold effect is normally not something that is required. You would
only consider running a Cabal Ritual if you really wanted to cheat on mana and
try to make your deck as consistent as possible for mulliganing purposes. Some
people include one or two Cabal Rituals as sideboard cards for certain matchups.

### Deckbuilding Ratios

As Dark Ritual is pretty much a core staple, the only consideration to changing
ratios tends to be around the number of Lotus Petals run. If you are on fifteen
or less mana producing lands then you should very much consider running the full
four. At sixteen to seventeen you can consider running maybe three and at
eighteen you should probably be running two at most. You should always consider
running at least two because of the usefulness in pile building such as in the
example below:

> {U}{U} + Cantrip

:::row{variant=PILE}
- IU
- LP
- LP
- EoA
- TO
:::

## Interaction

Under interaction, there are two additional sub-categories of cards. Proactive
and reactive. Proactive interaction is one you can use at any time to try and
either interfere with your opponent's game plan or to protect your own. Examples
of this include discard spells like :card[Duress]. Reactive interaction are
cards that rely on your opponent making an action before they can be used.
Examples of this include counter-magic like :card[Spell Pierce].

### Proactive Interaction

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Dur
- Tsz
- Teferi, Time Raveler
- Baleful Strix
- Wasteland
:::

Proactive interaction is most commonly found in Doomsday lists as either discard
effects such as Duress and :card[Thoughtseize] or tools like :card[Teferi, Time
Raveler]. They are generally useful in every matchup but can be considered slow
as they normally cost mana and are at Sorcery speed meaning they will not help
prevent turn one plays when on the draw.

Discard effects are good at providing information about a matchup early on and
either preventing your opponent landing relevant threats or taking away their
own interaction from them. They tend to excel in {U} based fair matchups or
against opposing combo decks. They are often weaker against fair non-{U} decks
or *stompy* type shells. The main limitation of discard effects is that, if they
are used on a turn prior to the combo turn, the opponent may have a chance to
draw into what they need.

Almost all styles of Doomsday list will run some number of discard effects,
normally splitting between Duress and Thoughtseize and ranging between two and
five copies. The ratio of the split normally favours Duress due to the impact of
the life loss from Thoughtseize and the bias of non-creature spells being more
impactful in matchups however this is meta-dependant and sometimes it is better
to favour Thoughtseize. You should always include at least one of each in order
to be able to incorporate the appropriate one in pile building. Some have tried
alternatives like :card[Cabal Therapy] and :card[Inquisition of Kozilek] however
they have been found to be not as effective as Duress and Thoughtseize.

Teferi is a very strong tool in the Doomsday arsenal. It prevents almost all
interaction during your combo turn and allows you to easily deploy your threats
whilst disrupting theirs with minimal fear of reprisal. It also has the handy
ability to act as slow card advantage and removal for troublesome permanents
with the -3 ability. The main weaknesses of Teferi include the fact that it is a
three mana spell which means it can be slow to be deployed. It is also removable
once down through opposing cards like :card[Abrupt Decay] and requires you to be
splashing into {W}. Because of this Teferi is not favoured outside of slower,
more controlling lists in general.

If running Teferi, it will normally be as a one to two of in the deck and will
be run alongside discard effects and other reactive disruption.

There is one more main class of proactive disruption in the form of running a
creature package. The most commonly found card for this is :card[Baleful Strix]
however other options like :card[Uro, Titan of Nature's Wrath] and
:card[Sedgemoor Witch] have been tried. The idea behind these is they act as
delays to your opponent's pressure whilst also providing additional card draws.
Uro and Sedgemoor both also provide an alternative way to win without casting
Doomsday for matchups where that may be useful.

If running Strixes, these normally are swapped out for some mix of free cycle
effects, :card[Daze] or Preordains. Adding some of the other creature packages
are less simple to map out but can also take the place of those slots alongside
Lotus Petals. Strixes are normally run as a two to four of and creature plans
like Uro a three to four of (where incorporated).

The final proactive interaction that can be run is some combination of Wasteland
and :card[Stifle]. Some use this as a way to actively disrupt their opponent's
manabase, much in the same vein that a tempo deck like Delver would, and use
that to accrue pseudo card advantage and prevent your opponent from being able
to interact with their resources. When run they are normally a compact package
never more than in a 3-3 split, normally around 2-2. They tend to be run with
faster to more balanced builds rather than slower ones and they take the slots
from free cycle effects and other interaction.

### Reactive Interaction

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Force of Will
- Daze
- Flusterstorm
- Veil of Summer
:::

Reactive interaction is most commonly found in Doomsday lists as either
counterspell effects such as :card[Force of Will] and Daze or tools like
:card[Veil of Summer]. They are effective at efficiently interacting with your
opponent's cards and can help in both offense and defense. These tend to be more
mana efficient than the proactive interaction available.

Countermagic is the most common form of interaction found in Doomsday. As with
many blue decks in Legacy, the first card to consider is Force of Will. Force
allows for interaction from turn one, even without lands in play, and provides a
catch-all answer to anything your opponent is trying to do. It also can be used
to help *push through* your own combo turn. As the Doomsday shell is
predominantly a heavy {U} deck, the cost can almost always be paid. Force of
Will is almost always run as a four of and should be considered a core staple of
the deck.

Daze is another excellent tool in terms of interaction. It provides a second,
mana-efficient piece of interaction that can help defend against key tap-out
threats like :card[Trinisphere] or :card[Sylvan Library] whilst also providing
the ability to push through early Doomsdays. As the game progresses they start
being less effective but can be used *pitch* to Force of Will meaning they are
never truly dead cards. For non-control based lists this is almost always a
four-of include into the deck as it really helps push through a lot of matchups.
In control lists it tends to not be included at all, instead being replace with
alternative tools like Baleful Strix and Teferi.

There are a couple of additional counter spell effects you can elect to run but
these are normally personal preference choices. :card[Flusterstorm] and Spell
Pierce are both viable options with the former being good at protecting your
combo and against opposing combo and the latter being better at protecting from
permanent hate like Blood Moon or planeswalkers like :card[Karn the Great
Creator]. These normally contend with the proactive interaction slots and are
only ever featured as a one or two-of at most. Some will also elect to run some
number of :card[Pact of Negation] however this will be discussed as a pile card.

Veil of Summer is an interesting interaction card. It can act both as proactive
interaction by initiating a combo turn with it, but can also act as reactive
interaction as part of a counter war or defending against opposing discard
effects or similar. We have elected to include it as reactive interaction
because the most common usage is in a reactive sense over a proactive sense. It
is very effective against opposing {U} or {B} based decks however it has almost
no text in non-{U} matchups and thus is normally relegated to the sideboard. If
it is run in the main it tends to replace some number of discard spells and is
only run as a two to three-of.

### Deckbuilding Ratios

When combining the two interaction types, most lists will have around a total of
eleven to thirteen interaction slots in them. These tend to be split into eight
to ten reactive slots and anywhere between two and eight proactive slots
depending on the style of the list being played. As mentioned, almost all lists
will have at a minimum four copies of Force of Will and at least one Duress and
one Thoughtseize. The rest becomes quite flexible.

Let's consider some example mana bases for different styles of play for the
deck. We shall present an aggressive, Grixis {U}{B}{R} *Turbo* package, a more
balanced straight {U}{B} package and an Uro style BUG {U}{B}{G} package.

#### {U}{B}{R} Turbo

- 4 Force of Will
- 4 Daze
- 2 Thoughtseize
- 1 Duress

A no-nonsense approach, this list would likely run a heavy number of free cycle
effects and a low number of lands. As a result it is relying on being able to go
fast and not need to worry about having a lot of interaction, only enough to try
and push through an early combo. It would also likely be supplemented by a Pact
of Negation too.

#### {U}{B} Balanced

- 4 Force of Will
- 4 Daze
- 2 Thoughtseize
- 3 Duress
- 1 Flusterstorm

Here you can see this list has opted to run a heavier discard package and some
additional counter magic. They have a higher land count than the *turbo* list
and likely fewer free cycle effects too which provides the slots to add these
additional interaction elements in.

#### {U}{B}{G} Uro

- 4 Force of Will
- 3 Daze
- 1 Thoughtseize
- 2 Duress
- 4 Baleful Strix
- 3 Uro, Titan of Nature's Wrath

This list has invested in having the alternate gameplan as part of it's
construction. Free cycle effects and Lotus Petals will probably both be very
low, land count will likely be high and you can see they have trimmed on a Daze
here too. This list will still be able to win fast but is expecting to have a
longer and grindier game most likely.

## Cantrips

### Cantrip Choices

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- BS
- Pnd
- Pre
- Mishra's Bauble
:::

Cantrips are a staple in {U} decks in Legacy and provide the ability to find the
cards you need at the time you need them and allow you to *cheat* on mana
resources as you don't have to rely on the top of your deck or openening hand to
draw them. I won't write too much in detail on the different cantrips used
however if you wish to read more about the ways of using them in the deck, feel
free to read [this article here](/articles/2020/10/05/gangsta-trippin).

There are two core cantrips which are run as a core part of the deck package;
:card[Brainstorm] and :card[Ponder]. These are both run as four-ofs and, without
very good justification, should likely never drop below that number. Preordain
is a more flexible cantrip, normally being run as at least a two-of but anywhere
up to a four-of most of the time. As said before the number of Preordains tends
to fluctuate with the style of the deck often being cut in favour of tutor
effects or creature packages.

:card[Mishra's Bauble] is a card that generally only gets played in slower
builds alongside high numbers of :card[Predict]. It acts as a delayed way to
draw into a pile as well as providing fetching information for either your own
deck or in terms of what your opponent is playing. Most importantly though it
allows you to consistently *hit* with Predict allowing the maximum card
advantage to be accrued with it. Outside of this interaction though, it is
likely worse than Preordain despite the lower cost as it decreases your
potential blue count for Force of Will and can be slow/not contribute to same
turn wins when you need them.

:card[Consider] is a new card from 2021 which has started to be incorporated
into lists. It acts like a cantrip however it is more accurate to describe it as
a *pile card* more than anything. If being run, it will be between 1 and 2
copies normally replacing some number of :card[Preordain].

### Deckbuilding Ratios

Most lists run around eleven cantrip effects, not including free cycle effects
or other pile cards like Predict. This is generally a 4/4/3 split of
Brainstorm/Ponder/Preordain with the Preordain slot being the one that changes.
It's a very flexible slot and can be replaced by any number of things including
interaction, free cycle effects or tutor effects. If you are unsure on what
style of list you wish to play it is likely better to run the full twelve
cantrips and then work out what you wish to replace them with at a later point
in testing.

## Pile Cards

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- TO
- EoA
- IU
- LED
- CoS
:::

This is probably the most diverse set of cards and might as well be titled
"miscellaneous" however there are some important pieces in here that are
fundamental to the deck. A lot of these cards do have a lot of usage outside of
the Doomsday pile but their core value/the reason they are in the deck is often
to be searched up and utilised as part of your combo. In theory almost all of
these are optional extras apart from one key component:

### Thassa's Oracle

:card[Thassa's Oracle] is the card you need to be able to win the game, (unless
you have a plan B) and therefore you have to run at least one of them. Some
people like to run two but the second is often relegated to the sideboard. There
is not much else to say other than the alternatives in :card[Laboratory Maniac]
and :card[Jace, Wielder of Mysteries] unfortunately do not display quite the
same efficiency or efficacy as a win condition of choice.

### Free Cycle Effects

The next set of pile cards to look at are the free cyclers. When we talk about
these are meaning :card[Street Wraith] and :card[Edge of Autumn]. In pile
building they provide a *free* way to draw a card that cannot be countered
through conventional means. This gives a lot of flexibility and enables a lot of
the faster, or same turn pile wins. Both tend to be run because sometimes the
life total can be pressured and you may not have the two life available to cycle
a Street Wraith, even though it is probably the more useful of the two outside
of the combo.

Depending on your playstyle you can probably run between one and six of these
effects. You will want at least one to be able to create Brainstorm piles that
use LED and a free cycle effect but after that it's up to personal taste. Most
*turbo* lists will run four to six. Normally one Edge and the rest Wraiths.
Balanced lists will run two to five, again with at least one Edge and finally
control or slower lists might only run one to two. If they are just running one
it is likely just a Street Wraith but either can be fine.

### Multi-Draw Spells

There are a few options for this category but they all do very similar things.
:card[Ideas Unbound], Predict and :card[Night's Whisper] all allow you to access
multiple cards in your pile at once. They also can have additional utility
outside of the combo with Predict and Whisper providing stable card advantage
over time. Ideas Unbound is the most effective/popular one with the others
sometimes providing a supporting role. Most of the time however only one
multi-draw spell is run in a list. Control style lists may consider to run
multiple Predict either with, or without, and Ideas Unbound in the list as a raw
card advantage engine.

### Lion's Eye Diamond

:card[Lion's Eye Diamond] (or LED) is an incredibly strong card that allows you,
in your piles, to cheat on mana. It has some limitations in not allowing you to
use counter magic to protect anything you cast with it but the benefits are so
large that these are not a concern. It is one of the cards that enables the
fastest wins and the most mana efficient piles in the deck. You should almost
always run one as a core card in the deck however any more can be a liability as
it has almost no use outside of piles (though there are some corner cases).

### Cavern of Souls

Cavern of Souls is an excellent way to ensure you can resolve Oracle in the face
of counter magic or a Chalice of the Void X = 2. It fits very neatly into the
shell and can be incorporated into many of the piles that are made. Lists will
run between zero and one of them, sometimes in the sideboard but mostly in the
main deck. Although it can tap for {C} it is not considered to be countered
towards your land/mana count and should instead be considered as a spell. It can
have some extra utility if you are running a creature package by allowing you to
cast those creatures with it. Good in heavy {U} metas.

### Pact of Negation

Pact of Negation is similar to Cavern in providing a mana efficient way to
protect your Oracle resolving however it has the added benefit of also stopping
effects like Stifle or :card[Endurance] from being used. If winning in the same
turn as you cast Doomsday you can also use it to help resolve the Doomsday in
the first place and, in a pinch, it can be used defensively too though this is
certainly not the optimal use of it. If it is run it is normally a single copy
which can be in the main or side however some do like running more if they want
to be more aggressive.

### Consider Package

As mentioned above in the cantrip section. :card[Consider] is a useful tool that
can enable some unique piles and help fortify existing ones. If running
Consider, it may optionally be paired with :card[Deep Analysis] which enables
very mana-efficient piles. Some elect to run this package over :card[Ideas
Unbound] whilst others prefer to run them in conjunction with one another. If
running the package, the Consider normally replaces a Preordain and the Deep
Analysis replaces a :card[Personal Tutor] or a free cycle effect. If planning to
go fast it is best to maximise the number of free cycle effects with
Consider/Deep Analysis as they also enable the ability to go for aggressive, low
resource wins.

## Putting It All Together

Now that we've seen all the components we need to work out how we want to fit
them into our list. We need to consider a few things before we start building to
work out how we want it to look.

Think about the following questions:

- What turn do we want to cast Doomsday on?
- How often do we want to make pass-the-turn piles?
- What part of the meta do we want to beat?
- What part of the meta do we want to avoid?
- Do we always want to ensure we are protected or are we happy to blindly *jam*
  at any given opportunity?
- What tools do we want access to in the sideboard?

If we want to cast Doomsday early then we want to maximise our cheap tutors and
number of mana accelerants and/or free cycle effects but will likely have to
reduce the number of lands and cantrips we run. We also probably want to include
Cavern and Ideas Unbound to enable to most efficient PTT piles and Consider with
Deep Analysis to provide the most mana efficient wins available to us. If we
want to pass the turn more we probably want a lower free cycle count and would
probably not run Pact of Negation. If we wanted to win on the same turn we cast
Doomsday more often we would probably maximise the use of both of these.

These are just a few things to have in mind when putting your decklist together.
As stated at the start of the chapter, it's not useful to present a *default*
decklist because there is no such thing. It's best to follow the principles
here, construct a list and test, test, test. Tinker with what you can and really
try to understand the purpose of running each card in your deck. That way if
anyone questions why you run a certain configuration you will be able to provide
the justification of each choice you make.

If you don't feel up to it or maybe don't have the luxury of time to be able to
follow this exercise then there are many examples of proven lists on websites
like TCDecks or that can be found in the `#decklists-archive` channel in the
[Doomsday Discord][discord].

## Next Steps

Now you have considered how to build your main deck, next chapter will explore
the principles behind sideboard card choices and the principles to follow for
facing off against different archetypes.

[discord]: https://discord.gg/vajvFXt
