---
authors: OtterLady, Doishy, AngryBacon
title: Matchup Guides
---

With this chapter we want to give you a brief overview over the most relevant
matchups in the *current* meta. We try to keep everything short and easy to
read.

Every matchup is organized as follows:

- **Game plan**: a short summary of the matchup
- **Cards to keep in mind**: cards that are important for the matchups
- **Gameplay**: a longer text on how to play the pre and post Doomsday parts of
  the matchup

For reference, the document assumes a standard *Meandeck* list and should stay
generic enough that it applies to all colors.

::decklist{path=meandeck.wub}
::decklist{path=meandeck.ubr}
::decklist{path=meandeck.ubg}

## Table of Contents

## UR Delver

Resolving an early Doomsday is very important, but it's also important to build
fast piles.

::accordion[Cards to keep in mind]{path=matchups/delver.ur.cards}
::accordion[Gameplay]{path=matchups/delver.ur.gameplay}

## Jeskai Control

The longer you wait, the harder it becomes to power through their card advantage
as they deploy their slow clock. The absence of :card[Lightning Bolt] means
passing the turn is safer than against other tempo strategies with red.

::accordion[Cards to keep in mind]{path=matchups/jeskai-control.cards}
::accordion[Gameplay]{path=matchups/jeskai-control.gameplay}

## Bant Miracles

Take your time. Their main clock consists of early striges and Uro which should
give you plenty of time to sculpt a hand and resolve Doomsday. Incidentally,
resolving a turn 1 Doomsday while they're unable to produce a clock fast enough
lets you protect a slow pass-the-turn pile thanks to :card[Cavern of Souls] or
countermagic in multiple. The idea is that by stacking your next 5 draws you're
supposedly drawing *better* than they will.

Beware the eventual maindeck :card[Endurance] and :card[Dress Down]!

::accordion[Cards to keep in mind]{path=matchups/miracles.wug.cards}
::accordion[Gameplay]{path=matchups/miracles.wug.gameplay}

## Death and Taxes

Slam early and build your pile around mana and card draw denial.

In longer games, they'll have access to more lock pieces and winning becomes a
real puzzle. Winning early allows you to ignore most of them as they become
relevant much later in the game. For instance resolving Doomsday on turn 1
planning a turn 2 win plays around instant-speed :card[Flickerwisp] and
:card[Skyclave Apparition]. In this case, you are giving them only one turn to
react leaving much less options for them. Suddenly, you only have to beat one
of: :card[Wasteland], :card[Rishadan Port], :card[Thalia, Guardian of Thraben]
or :card[Spirit of the Labyrinth] instead of everything at once.

::accordion[Cards to keep in mind]{path=matchups/death-and-taxes.cards}
::accordion[Gameplay]{path=matchups/death-and-taxes.gameplay}

## Maverick

Similarly to the Death and Taxes matchup, an early Doomsday gives you enough
time to build safe piles. Avoid burying yourself under lock pieces for no good
reason.

::accordion[Cards to keep in mind]{path=matchups/maverick.cards}
::accordion[Gameplay]{path=matchups/maverick.gameplay}

## Lands

Playing the long game is not a winning line.

::accordion[Cards to keep in mind]{path=matchups/lands.cards}
::accordion[Gameplay]{path=matchups/lands.gameplay}

## Mono-Green Cloudpost

Just slam, and beat Endurance post-Doomsday.

::accordion[Cards to keep in mind]{path=matchups/post.cards}
::accordion[Gameplay]{path=matchups/post.gameplay}

## GW Depths

Cast Doomsday as soons as possible, and play around Endurance.

::accordion[Cards to keep in mind]{path=matchups/depths.wg.cards}
::accordion[Gameplay]{path=matchups/depths.wg.gameplay}

## The Epic Storm

Keep countermagic up and do not pass the turn after Doomsday without protection.

::accordion[Cards to keep in mind]{path=matchups/tes.cards}
::accordion[Gameplay]{path=matchups/tes.gameplay}

## Elves

Don't rely on countermagic, resolving an early Doomsday is a good way to win.

::accordion[Cards to keep in mind]{path=matchups/elves.cards}
::accordion[Gameplay]{path=matchups/elves.gameplay}

## Aluren

You are a lot faster and you have more protection. Don't play scared, play like
against a bad control deck.

::accordion[Cards to keep in mind]{path=matchups/aluren.cards}
::accordion[Gameplay]{path=matchups/aluren.gameplay}

## Reanimator

Countermagic is essential. Counter their enablers.

::accordion[Cards to keep in mind]{path=matchups/reanimator.cards}
::accordion[Gameplay]{path=matchups/reanimator.gameplay}

## Sneak And Show

You are a bit faster, use this to your advantage.

::accordion[Cards to keep in mind]{path=matchups/show.ur.cards}
::accordion[Gameplay]{path=matchups/show.ur.gameplay}

## UG Omni-Tell

They are just a bad control deck with a combo finish. Omni-Tell can not beat you
post-Doomsday.

::accordion[Cards to keep in mind]{path=matchups/show.ug.cards}
::accordion[Gameplay]{path=matchups/show.ug.gameplay}

## Hogaak

Race them, but keep their opportunity to mill you out in mind.

::accordion[Cards to keep in mind]{path=matchups/hogaak.cards}
::accordion[Gameplay]{path=matchups/hogaak.gameplay}

## Madness

Just race, don't rely on a turn 3 Doomsday off your lands.

::accordion[Cards to keep in mind]{path=matchups/madness.cards}
::accordion[Gameplay]{path=matchups/madness.gameplay}

## Esper Vial

Meddling Mage is the matchup defining card.

::accordion[Cards to keep in mind]{path=matchups/esper-vial.cards}
::accordion[Gameplay]{path=matchups/esper-vial.gameplay}
