---
authors: Nevilshute, Hulahula, Emidln, Monkeyscantcry, Romariovidal, Doishy
title: General Sideboard Principles
---

In this chapter we will present the concepts and elements to consider when
building your sideboard and against some of the more resilient archetypes to
meta shifts. Obviously with new printings or different metagames these concepts
may change so please consider what decks you expect to face and amend
accordingly. Some of this will overlap with what is discussed in the [Playing
Around Interaction](/meandeck/interaction/) section.

## Your Deck Construction

### List Assumptions

There will need to be some assumptions made on the list you are playing, even
despite flex slots available. These assumptions are that you will run, at a
minimum, the following cards in your main deck configuration:

- 4 Doomsday
- 4 Dark Ritual
- 4 Daze
- 4 Force of Will
- 1-2 Street Wraith
- 1 Edge of Autumn
- 1 Lion's Eye Diamond
- 2-3 Lotus Petal
- 3-4 *Other protection slots* such as discard effects or Veil of Summer
- 1-2 Predict / Ideas Unbound
- 1-2 *Additional Search* such as Lim-DÃ»l's Vault or Personal Tutor
- 4 Ponder
- 4 Brainstorm
- 4 Preordain
- 8 Fetchlands
- 2-3 Basic lands
- 5-6 Dual lands

### Sideboard Tools

Generally, when constructing your sideboard, you need to both have a good grasp
on what the metagame you are expecting to face looks like and to have cards that
are applicable to multiple match-ups where possible. Trying to run *silver
bullets* for archetypes which you have a bad match-up with, but whose meta
penetration is very low, is a misuse of potential card slots. Likewise,
dedicating too many slots to a deck that is considered tier 1 could mean you get
overrun by all the other decks that you are likely to face in a normal, healthy
metagame.

Most sideboard tools at your disposal can be attributed to dealing with certain
types of opposing interaction or game plans, although in some cases, there are
slots that fulfil multiple roles. Knowing what weaknesses you need to shore up
in what match-ups, and when to respect something and when to accept / ignore it,
is a key skill in general deck construction.

The following categories should be consider broad sub-groups and, like our
maindeck configuration, are based on some assumptions of what is being run. As
the deck can have many *splash colour* options it is good to be familiar with
what tools you might be able to work with to achieve an effect under each group
in order to have the required tools available. It should be mentioned that
diversifying your tools, even with similar effects is a good idea if you expect
cards like Meddling Mage to be prominent.

#### Permanent Removal

Permanent removal is anything that can deal with hateful interaction such as
Chalice of the Void, Deafening Silence, Counterbalance, Trinisphere or Narset,
Parter of Veils. Normally it can also deal with creature based interaction too
but not always. There is a lot of overlap between the two categories however the
permanent removal section is generally a bit broader. Often is is favourable to
have only permanent removal then maybe 1 additional flex slot of creature
removal depending on what is expected to be faced or what your colour
requirements allow.

You probably want 2-4 slots dedicated to this role.

Some key examples of permanent removal to consider:

- Abrupt Decay
- Assasin's Trophy
- Abrade
- Goblin Cratermaker
- Serenity
- Teferi's Realm
- Chain of Vapor
- Pyroblast/Red Elemental Blast
- Pernicious Deed
- Echoing Truth
- Hurkyl's Recall

<row variant="pile">{{!Abrupt Decay}} {{!Abrade}} {{!Goblin Cratermaker}} {{!Teferi's Realm}} {{!Pernicious Deed}}</row>

#### Creature Removal

Creature removal is normally more dedicated for just creatures. A lot of the
tools listed above can also be used to remove them but below are some of the
more dedicated options.

You likely want only 1-2 slots dedicated to this role.

Some key examples of creature removal to consider:

- Swords to Plowshares
- Fatal Push
- Massacre
- Drown in the Loch
- Toxic Deluge
- Dead of Winter
- Terminus

<row variant="pile">{{!Swords to Plowshares}} {{!Fatal Push}} {{!Massacre}} {{!Toxic Deluge}} {{!Terminus}}</row>

#### Anti-Blue

These are cards that tend to be biased towards stopping blue-based strategies
from interacting favourably. Some may have relevance in other matchups but that
is their main purpose.

You probably want 1-4 slots dedicated to this role.

Some key examples of anti-blue to consider:

- Silence
- Orim's Chant
- Pyroblast / Red Elemental Blast
- Veil of Summer
- Cavern of Souls (if not main)
- Spell Pierce
- Flusterstorm
- Hope of Ghirapur
- Xantid Swarm
- Defense Grid

<row variant="pile">{{!Silence}} {{!Pyroblast}} {{!Hope of Ghirapur}} {{!Red Elemental Blast}} {{!Xantid Swarm}}</row>

#### Anti-Combo

These are cards that tend to be geared towards preventing other proactive combo
decks from initiating or implementing their plans. They tend to be cheap
disruptive cards that are designed to interact with the opponent.

You probably want 2-3 slots dedicated to this role.

Some key examples of anti-combo to consider:

- Veil of Summer
- Flusterstorm
- Spell Pierce
- Mindbreak Trap
- Force of Negation
- Lavinia, Azorius Renegade

<row variant="pile">{{!Veil of Summer}} {{!Flusterstorm}} {{!Spell Pierce}} {{!Mindbreak Trap}} {{!Force of Negation}}</row>

#### Anti-Graveyard

These are cards designed to interact with the graveyard. They tend to remove
cards from a graveyard, either in a targeted or non-targeted fashion. They
should be thought of as *Hard* anti-graveyard cards or *Soft* anti-graveyard
card.

If using Leyline of the Void you likely want to run 4, if not then 2-3 slots
should suffice.

Some key examples of anti-graveyard to consider:

- Surgical Extraction (soft)
- Tormod's Crypt (soft)
- Leyline of the Void (hard)
- Rest in Peace (hard)
- Nihil Spellbomb (soft)
- Grafdigger's Cage (hard)
- Faerie Macabre (soft)
- Relic of Progrenitus (soft)

<row variant="pile">{{!Leyline of the Void}} {{!Tormod's Crypt}} {{!Surgical Extraction}} {{!Rest in Peace}} {{!Grafdigger's Cage}}</row>

#### Mana-Assets

These are cards that help reinforce your manabase in some way. They may be an
extra instance of a splash colour, additional basis to fight against Wasteland
strategies or other mana based tools to use.

You probably want 1-3 slots dedicated to this role.

Some key examples of mana-assets to consider:

- Carpet of Flowers
- Cavern of Souls (if not main)
- Basic lands
- B/x Splash duals like Badlands or Bayou

<row variant="pile">{{!Carpet of Flowers}} {{!Cavern of Souls}} {{!Snow-Covered Plains}} {{!Badlands}} {{!Bayou}}</row>

## Sideboarding Strategies

Below we shall present some primary archetypes of legacy decks that you will
likely encounter in the meta and present some general sideboarding theories to
follow when facing them. These have been crowd-sourced from some well
established players with plenty of experience behind them.

The archetypes will be listed with some key deck examples of the archetype.
Hopefully, even if the metagame changes, these high level archetypes will still
be applicable. Each archetype will have a brief description followed by the sort
of cards you want to bring in and take out post-sideboarding. Often, if you are
unsure of how to gain a space in the deck to board in an additional card it is
worth considering removing a Lotus Petal or Preordain depending on the matchup.
Finally a brief guide to what sort of hands to keep and what sort of game plan
to have will be written, accompanied with some examples of the archetype.

### Graveyard Strategies

Graveyard strategies can normally be considered quite fast / explosive. They
tend to rely on the graveyard for advantage but can sometimes have a plan B that
allows them to circumnavigate its usage. This is the key matchup set to bring in
the Anti-Graveyard tools, probably all of them, from your sideboard. You
generally want to trim some of the slower elements from your deck as you want to
aim for a swift kill. If you have tools like Cavern of Souls or Pyroblast in the
main deck, then these can be taken out as often they will not interact with what
the opponent could bring in. You can also trim a land, often a basic Island, and
potentially 1 or more copies of Predict (unless Predict is your only pile draw
card). Your mana base will not be pressured so you can aggressively fix by
fetching dual lands and not need to worry about not being able to achieve {U}{U}
for Ideas Unbound (if you run it). If the opposing deck includes a lot of hand
disruption then bringing in cheap interaction such as Veil of Summer, Spell
Pierce or Flusterstorm if you have it can also help buy time to allow you to
combo off. Normally removal is not effective against these strategies.

If you are running Leyline of the Void then either mulliganing aggressively for
it or for a fast combo is a good idea. If you are on a mix of the *softer*
graveyard permission like Surgical Extraction or Tormod's Crypt then finding a
hand with one of these and / or some light permission like Daze can be
effective. Again, trying to achieve a quick win is favoured as often the
graveyard decks can skimp on stack based interaction however do be mindful of
tools like Mindbreak Trap which can be be brought in or opposing Surgical
Extractions or similar. If you end up with a slower hand then mitigate their
disruption with your soft permission and try and find a Doomsday as quickly as
possible.

Examples of this archetype include:

- LED/Manaless Dredge
- {B}{R} Reanimator
- Hogaak variants
- {U}{B}{R} Phoenix

<row variant="pile">{{!Griselbrand}} {{!Dread Return}} {{!Ichorid}} {{!Hogaak, Arisen Necropolis}} {{!Arclight Phoenix}}</row>

### Blue-Based Control

Blue based control can represent a number of archetypes however they generally
use a mix of cantrips, removal spells and countermagic to draw out the game and
gain advantage through it going long. Normally the win conditions utilised are
not very fast to deploy or are slow to get going, often relying more on defense
than aggression. Bringing the tool suite from the Anti-Blue package is normally
most effective with some consideration given to needing to bring in Permanent
Removal too as often you can face cards like Deafening Silence, Counterbalance
or Back to Basics. Boarding out cards that are effective in fast games is a good
idea as these matches will tend to be longer. Cards like Lion's Eye Diamond,
Lotus Petal, Daze, Lim-DÃ»l's Vault, Baleful Strix and Unearth are good
considerations for taking out.

You want to keep any hand that has a good mix of serviceable spells and relevant
lands. Having at least one piece of 1 for 1 interaction like Pyroblast, Duress
or Veil of Summer is really strong here. You need to be mindful of what is worth
fighting over in these matchups so as not to be distracted on your own gameplan.
It is better to hold on to your interaction to protect your own combo than to
disrupt some of the grindy control elements your opponent might use. Things like
a first casting of Uro, Titan of Nature's Wrath or the playing of a Null Rod can
often be ignored (hand permitting). There is some consideration with preventing
something like Sylvan Library or Oko, Thief of Crowns resolving if you expect
the game to go on too long but otherwise these can also be disregarded in favour
of progressing your own plan. Threats you should consider fighting are cards
like Leovold, Emissary of Trest as this disrupts our combo and provides a
not-insignificant pressure on our life total. Often, if presented with the
opportunity with an early Doomsday you should take it. Cavern of Souls means
that you can commit to a pass the turn pile across multiple turns and still
manage to circumnavigate the majority of what interaction they can bring.

Examples of this archetype include:

- Miracles
- Sharkstill
- Stryfo Pile
- Snowko

<row variant="pile">{{!Counterbalance}} {{!Standstill}} {{!Dack Fayden}} {{!Oko, Thief of Crowns}} {{!Arcum's Astrolabe}}</row>

### Delver Strategies

Delver strategies are one of the most common found in legacy and one of the more
difficult ones for Doomsday to face against. The archetype tends to land a
cheap, aggressive threat which can then close out the game, backed up by cheap
disruption. Racing these decks is difficult due to the high amount of
interaction they bring but falling into the long game can result in one of their
threats providing heavy pressure. You want to bring in some elements of the
Anti-Blue package however consideration should be more focussed on Mana assets.
Delver strategies try to limit your resources so bring cards like Carpet of
Flowers in means you negate their soft permission and mana denial plan. Some
pilots like to bring in creature removal for their threats however a lot of the
time, trying to fight the Delver player *on the ground* results in wasting time
and playing into their strategy. Similar to blue based control you should
consider slowing down a little to ensure resilience against their disruption and
take out cards like Lion's Eye Diamond, Lotus Petal, Lim-DÃ»l's Vault and
Unearth. Force of Will and Daze are both considerations for removal too, however
you should decide to keep one or the other and this could be dependent on being
on the play vs being on the draw or how much you feel your mana is constrained.

If possible you want to avoid keeping a hand that is too *all-in* and preferably
have multiple mana sources at your disposal as Wasteland and Stifle can both be
a concern. Aggressively fetching your basic lands is advantageous unless you
think you have enough resilience to ignore any Wasteland effects. Try not to
feel pressured to jam too quickly but be mindful that thanks to cards like
Dreadhorde Arcananist, Lightning Bolt and the Berserk/Invigorate combo can cause
you to lose quickly. Stifle is the scariest tool in the arsenal of these decks
as it gets around Cavern of Souls and Veil of Summer so removing that via
Discard is a prioity. Try to avoid playing into Daze and avoid fighting over
their threats if you have the luxury to do so.

Examples of this archetype include:

- {R}{U}{G} Delver
- {U}{B} Ninjas
- {B}{U}{G} Shadow
- {U}{G} Infect

<row variant="pile">{{!Delver of Secrets}} {{!Dreadhorde Arcanist}} {{!Daze}} {{!Death's Shadow}} {{!Glistener Elf}}</row>

### Creature Based Strategies

These look to both disrupt and pressure the opponent via a large creature
presence. Often these decks rely on tools like Aether Vial or Green Sun's Zenith
to increase the speed and likelihood that they can commit their threats to the
board. They tend to not run stack based or hand based disruption, instead
relying on permanent based interaction. You want to bring in your permanent and
creature based removal for these match-ups. You can likely trim elements such as
Duress, Thoughtseize, Cavern of Souls, Pyroblasts or Veil of Summer type
effects.

If you have a fast kill in hand you can keep that with a reasonable chance of
getting there. The only potential disruption to consider is Mindbreak Trap or
Surgical Extraction effects for same turn wins and something like Deafening
Silence, Ethersworn Canonist, Thalia, Guardian of Thraben or Choke for pass the
turn wins. Having a piece of removal in your starting hand is favourable but not
something you should mulligan too aggressively towards. Try to avoid needing to
go for Unearth based wins as they could run tools like Elvish Reclaimer or
Knight of the Reliquary that could fetch Bojuka Bog or have an on-board
Scavenging Ooze or Containment Priest. Speed is normally better in these
matchups.

Examples of this archetype include:

- Death and Taxes
- Goblins
- Maverick

<row variant="pile">{{!Aether Vial}} {{!Green Sun's Zenith}} {{!Thalia, Guardian of Thraben}} {{!Goblin Lackey}} {{!Knight of the Reliquary}}</row>

### Fast Combo

These decks are on a plan similar to ours. Get the opponent dead fast and
preferably in a single turn. They tend to feature similar disruption in order to
circumnavigate opposing countermagic or interaction. Often they use cards like
Thoughtseize, Duress, Unmask, Veil of Summer and Defense Grid to try and get
their combo through. If they are blue based combo then they will rely on
countermagic, perhaps in conjecture with other tools, in order to *force
through* the win. Against non-blue based combo you should focus on balancing
defense with offense. As much interaction as is relevant should be brought in.
Cards like Flusterstorm, Veil of Summer, Spell Pierce and Mindbreak Trap should
be brought in. If the opposing combo has a single key combo piece or a reliance
on the graveyard then Surgical Extraction can also be considered to be brought
in. Take out things like Cavern of Souls, basic Island, slower cards like
Lim-DÃ»l's Vault, maindeck Pyroblasts, any maindeck removal and potentially
Predict / Unearth if you are running Ideas Unbound. If you are against blue
based combo then the Anti-blue suite should be brought in as well as other
disruption. Remove things like Lion's Eye Diamond, Lim-DÃ»l's Vault, Unearth,
Predict, basic Island and maindeck removal.

You want to keep a hand that is either fast or heavy in disruption. Depending on
the matchup and speed of the opposing combo you may wish to mulligan
aggressively for Force of Will when on the draw however this could leave you
with an unplayable hand so it is more sensible to keep a balanced 7 and accept
that you might get *Force checked* in the first turn of the game. Many combo
decks aim to reduce your life total to 0 therefore it can be risky progressing a
pass-the-turn pile as it may give them the opportunity they need however you
could be under threat of having your combo pieces discarded if you don't take an
opportunity. The specific matchup and your hand composition should help inform
you of the decision to take. Try to balance finding your own plan whilst
disrupting theirs and again work out the threat assessment of certain cards.
Cards like Daze will lose value as the match develops so consider using them
aggressively unless you have a Force of Will to *pitch* them to. It might be
better to use your mana to hold up disruption over using your cantrips to full
turn efficiency.

Examples of this archetype include:

(Non-blue based)

- ANT
- Belcher
- TES
- Turbo Depths

(Blue-based)

- Omnitell
- Sneak and Show
- Doomsday
- High Tide

<row variant="pile">{{!Tendrils of Agony}} {{!Goblin Charbelcher}} {{!Dark Depths}} {{!Show and Tell}} {{!High Tide}}</row>

### Stompy Strategies

Stompy strategies are defined by trying to utilise cards like Chalice of the
Void and Blood Moon coupled with fast mana from cards like Ancient Tomb, City of
Traitors, Chrome Mox and Simian Spirit Guide to try and lock out the opposing
deck and deploy fast-ramping threats like Goblin Rabblemaster, Thoughtknot Seer
or Arcbound Ravager to end the game. They normally run a suite of permanent
based disruption cards and, if in {R}, Pyroblast effects to disrupt our
strategy. It is best to bring in permanent removal to deal with their static
disruption. You should consider taking out cards like any maindeck Pyroblast
effects, Veil of Summers, Flusterstorms and cards like Thoughtseize, Duress and
maybe some number of Preordains. Cavern of Souls stays in as sometimes they can
deploy a Chalice of the Void set to 2 which Cavern gets around.

You want a hand that can prevent their disruption if deployed early or
circumnavigate it by either having a quick (and resilient) kill or having a
slightly slower but deterministic one. Be mindful that they may have a threat
heavy hand with little disruption or a disruption heavy hand with no threats.
Knowing which it is can be difficult but you should try and assess what pieces
you can ignore and what must be dealt with. The scariest card from a Stompy deck
is probably Thoughtknot Seer as it represents both disruption and pressure in a
single card.

Examples of this archetype include:

- Moon Stompy
- Eldrazi Stompy
- 12 Post
- Steel Stompy

<row variant="pile">{{!Chalice of the Void}} {{!Blood Moon}} {{!Thoughtknot Seer}} {{!Karn, the Great Creator}} {{!Cloudpost}}</row>

### Hybrid Archetypes

Not every deck can be nicely categorised and often decks will exhibit elements
from multiple of the archetypes listed. When facing them you have to try and
assess which parts of their strategy you most need to interact with in order to
facilitate your gameplan or to prevent theirs. At the end of the day this comes
down with experience and if a tool you have seems to fit against a deck that is
sligtly spicy or counter-intuitive to what has been written above then do not be
afraid to *go with your gut*. Just be mindful that you cannot hedge against
everything without severely diluting your primary gameplan. Accepting that
sometimes you will lose to an oddball card or a very specific silver bullet like
Ashiok, Nightmare Weaver is fine.

Below are a few examples of decks that could fit multiple archetypes and the
elements to consider when facing them:

#### Urza Echo

Part Stompy deck and part blue based combo deck. This deck can be difficult to
deal with. They will have both Force of Will and Chalice of the Void post board
so you will want to consider balancing out permanent removal and your Anti-blue
suite for the match. If you run Leyline of the Void then that could be a
consideration but any soft graveyard interaction is likely a trap to run.

#### Esper Vial

Part creature based deck and part blue based control, their disruption suite
tends to be a mix of Force of Wills and Force of Negations coupled with cards
like Meddling Mage and other hatebear type effects. You will definately want
your Anti-blue suite along with some additional permanent and/or creature
removal to help face them. Disguising what deck you are on pre-board can help
avoid any relevant Meddling Mage naming against you.

#### Aluren

Part combo deck and part blue based control, they tend to rely on just pitch
countermagic coupled with cards like Leovold, Emissary of Trest. You want to
bring in Anti-blue cards but be mindful they can play a relatively fast combo to
win.

#### Elves

Part creature deck and part combo deck, they can kill swiftly but often have a
lot of creature based interaction they can deploy. Having 1 for 1 answers to
their combo items is effective but consideration should be given to other
permanents they can run. Some lists may also run discard effects. With the
printing of Allosaurus Shepherd these decks can bypass a lot of your disruption
suite so aiming for a quick combo is pretty key.

#### Oops all Spells

Part graveyard deck and part combo deck, they are popular and more resilient
with the modal double faced land cards. You should be okay boarding in a similar
fashion when facing reanimator to maximise early disruption and interaction and
play a slightly more controlling role.

## Closing Words

Hopefully this guide provides some of the thought processes needed to approach
matchups. When you get a list that you like and become familiar with I would
recommend having a go at a sideboard guide writing exercise. Even if you would
rather try to *netdeck* one for convenience and end up disregarding your own,
it's a good way to consider how to approach a matchup and what the relative
value of the cards in your list, both main and side, have. If you still find you
struggle with the theory behind a given match-up then please don't be afraid to
ask for help but remember, the best help is learning how to work it out yourself
rather than following a guide by rote!
