---
authors: Doishy
banner: Consider
kind: REPORT
tags: [LEGACY, MEANDECK]
title: "Doomsday at the Legacy Pit Open: An Interview with RomarioVidal"
---

## Table of Contents

## Preface

Last weekend (weekend of September the 18th 2021) The Legacy Pit hosted the
Legacy Pit Open; a large, competitive event for Legacy in the US. The event was
very successful and a number of people have already written reports / write ups
of their tournament experience. Various archetypes were represented including a
fair few people out to jam some Doomsday in paper. We approached those who were
part of the online community and asked if anyone was willing to write up a
report of their event and we had a brilliant response with 4 pilots submitting
reports for this article and 1 of them even offering to talk over the experience
in an interview too!

For the wider meta and to follow the decklists within the event it can all be
found online along with the organiser's website (they produce a lot of good
content so please check them out!):

[Event MtGMelee Page](https://mtgmelee.com/Tournament/View/7720)

[Legacy Data Collection Project Data sheet for the
event](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1NTpJqzHyaRTnV6h6tneYo_Gh8jNGRb_1byaE9sJPmII/edit#gid=303790053)

[The Legacy Pit Website](https://thelegacypit.com)

## The Interview with Romario

Linked below you can find a link to the interview I (Doishy) had with Romario
Vidal. This was a great chat and covered his thoughts going into the event, his
deck choice decisions, the event itself and future thoughts including how
:card[Consider] might be changing the lists pilots run. The interview is just
under 2 hours (1 hour 49 minutes) and has been cleaned up to hopefully make it
palatable for the ears. Currently it is only available on Youtube because
unfortunately the payment model on SoundCloud means we cannot upload any
additional content on there without paying for the privilege. Please do have a
listen if you have time!

:youtube{id=PHycYczJ_dk}

## The Player's Reports

We had 4 players submit reports which you will be able to read below. Overall
Doomsday had a very good showing in the event, despite the high numbers of
{U}{R} Delver and Ragavan decks in general. With 11 pilots Doomsday, had around
a 3% meta share and boasted an impressive 58.54% match win rate (without
mirror). This was the best performance of any deck with a playerbase >10 in the
event so a huge well done to all the player's collective performance.

The players who were able to submit a report were RomarioVidal,
VendillionMisclique, germancouch and Ruta Barracuda so a huge thank-you to them
for being willing to take the time to provide those reports. There were also
some other great results from other players but they were not able to find the
time to submit anything.

### Romario *RomarioVidal* Neto - 25th Place (7-2)

[Romario's Twitter](https://twitter.com/romarioneto3)  
[Romario's Twitch](https://www.twitch.tv/romariovidal)

::decklist{path=2021/09/27/meandeck.romariovidal}

> This past weekend the guy from The Legacy Pit hosted an event in Frederick MD,
> this was the first large event since the start of the pandemic in NA. The
> tournament was only a few hours away driving from my house and, like a lot of
> other legacy enthusiasts, I was itching to play some paper legacy.
>
> The general perception was the meta was being dominated by Ragavan/DRC/Urza's
> Saga decks. Out of those 3, Ragavan represented the biggest threat to my deck
> of choice: Doomsday. I didn’t really do any extensive testing or preparation
> for the event due to some family schedule changes and some other personal
> businesses, but I was did play a good number of leagues and tried a few
> different deck configurations. Eventually I settled on the *Kai Sawatari**
> Doomsday list, it’s the list most similar to the lists I was familiar and have
> had some previous good results.
>
> So onto the event, we were required to submit decklists and register ahead of
> time since there wouldn’t be any in-person registration, with that being said
> I registered the Wednesday before the event.

#### Round 1 vs Sam Roukas on Jeskai Sagavan. Loss (0-2)

G1. I kept a hand that could cast Doomsday with :card[Force of Will] but there
were no lands. If I remember correctly this was my opening 7: 2x :card[Lotus
Petal], :card[Dark Ritual], :card[Doomsday], :card[Thoughtseize], :card[Force of
Will], :card[Daze]. I am also on the draw in this game. They played a
:card[Wasteland] and passed the turn. On my turn I cast Petal >
:card[Thoughtseize], I see double :card[Daze], :card[Expressive Iteration] and
some lands, I took a :card[Daze]; I cast :card[Dark Ritual] into
:card[Doomsday], now the pile I ended up building was what I like to call the
DnT pile, 2x fetches, :card[Thassa's Oracle] and 2 fetchable lands. This pile
would lose to a second piece of countermagic but it would beat removal, the
:card[Daze] I knew about and :card[Wasteland]. They drew a :card[Force of Will]
and we went to play g2.

G2. Nothing really interesting happened in this game I took a long time to find
:card[Doomsday] while Ragavan kept attacking by the time I found :card[Doomsday]
it was too late.

#### Round 2 vs Denver Rapp on UB Reanimator. Win (2-0)

This deck was a bit of a brew but it had all the good cards you would expect to
see in an reanimator deck plus some :card[Show and Tell] and some tin fins
elements.

G1. I saw a basic Swamp and an :card[Entomb], that was it. When I went for the
combo they seemed to just have f6’d. I sideboarded for {B}{R} reanimator.

G2. Opponent caught me off guard when they played a basic Island into
:card[Careful Study], I sideboarded out some of my discard spells but now I
realized I am playing against a deck that is also playing countermagic. Luckily
they were able to put :card[Iona, Shield of Emeria] in the graveyard but not
reanimate it back before I could resolve :card[Thassa’s Oracle].

#### Round 3 vs Derek Toth on Urza Echo. Win (2-0)

G1. This is another game that I didn’t get the right deck my opponent was
playing. They cast a :card[Chalice of the Void] on turn one off a :card[City of
Traitors] which I countered. I cast :card[Doomsday] the following turn and make
a pile that can beat anything but a :card[Trinisphere], they don’t cast anything
and just pass the turn, :card[Thassa’s Oracle] enters the battlefield and we
reach for our sideboards. I thought my opponent was on mono {R} stompy but in
this case I think I would still SB the same way.

G2. They had sort of a slow start just casting some baubles but nothing else
until after I resolved :card[Doomsday], they cast a :card[Karn, the Great
Creator], I let it resolve even though I had :card[Force of Negation],
:card[Force of Will] and a blue card in hand. They minus Karn to get a
:card[Tormod's Crypt] then try to flashback an :card[Echo of Eons] with a
:card[Lion's Eye Diamond]. I countered and won on the following turn.

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Urza, Lord High Artificer
:::

#### Round 4 vs Tony *Into_Play* Murata on Mono Green Cloudpost. Win (2-0)

This round I played against the great and powerful Tony Murata aka into_play on
mtgo, well known caster of :card[Primeval Titan]s.

G1. So this is one of the best MUs for :card[Doomsday], it's not say you can't
lose as the combo player, with the printing of :card[Endurance] things got a lot
more tricky. I wasn't expecting much interaction from Tony's side of the table
before board and made a pretty basic :card[Brainstorm] pile.

G2. I boarded in the :card[Emrakul, the Aeon's Torn] + :card[Shelldock Isle]
plan in this game. I knew it could be a bad idea since they play cards like
:card[Pithing Needle], :card[Karakas] and possibly :card[Wasteland] /
:card[Ghost Quarter]. I cast :card[Doomsday] on turn 2, the pile I made was
:card[Brainstorm] (Emrakul was in my hand), :card[Shelldock Isle],
:card[Thassa's Oracle], :card[Underground Sea] and :card[Doomsday]. I put
shelldock in play on turn 3, Tony cast a :card[Crop Rotation] when Emrakul
resolves, I countered and he conceded. The idea here was to have a second
:card[Doomsday] to refill my deck in case I needed to attack twice with Emrakul.

#### Round 5 vs Bob *Griselpuff* Huang on Urza Affinity. Loss (1-2)

Played against legacy master Bob Huang, earlier in the day I asked if he was on
Delver he told me Affinity. Honestly I thought was trolling me for a second, it
turns out he was not.

G1. I mulled to 6 trying to find a hand that could cast a quick Doomsday, but I
wasn't able to put {B}{B}{B} and :card[Doomsday] together before a couple of
constructs reduced my life total to 0.

G2. I tried basically the same plan as game 1 but this time I was able to combo
before getting attacked down to 0.

G3. I found the combo pieces a turn too late, but overall I think this was one
of the MUs I hadn't played any matches against it, I didn't really approach the
games correctly.

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Thought Monitor
:::

#### Round 6 vs Matthew *TheHackbert* Hackbert on Cephalid Breakfast. Win (2-0)

Played against another great player from Arizona, the awesome Matt Hackbert.

G1. Last time I talked to Matt he was playing Tin Fins/Ice Station Zebra type of
decks but he was also posting in the Doomsday discord. I was able to combo kinda
early in the game, and the only cards I saw were a couple cantrips and a
:card[Cabal Therapy].

G2. I thought Matt was on some kind of combo and I was right I just wasn't
expecting cephalid breakfast. Funny part is I kept a hand with 3
:card[Doomsday], the only thing I kept thinking was “If he plays a Therapy I am
conceding before he even names “Doomsday”. Matt made a small mistake that ended
up costing him the game and therefore the match.

#### Round 7 vs Jeffrey Carr on UR Sagavan. Win (2-1)

Things started getting interesting from this round on, at least in terms of
tournament prize. Earlier in the day the tournament organizers announced they
expanded the prize support to anyone who finished X-3 or better. At this point I
had 2 losses, which meant I could only lose 1 match in the last 3 rounds if I
wanted to at least make my entry fee money back. You can imagine I was very
thrilled to face probably the worst MU for Doomsday.

G1. Now this is getting late in the day, I am starting to get a bit tired, not
writing notes means I am not 100% on these boardstate and play sequences but I
am going to to my best. This game was decided by an early :card[Doomsday] and
later a :card[Thassa's Oracle] with some :card[Force of Will] back up, but my
opponent didn't actually have any interactions besides the :card[Daze] they had
for my Doomsday.

G2. I lost to a :card[Ragavan, Nimble Pilferer], plus :card[Wasteland] and
:card[Murktide Regent]. I did cast a late :card[Thoughtseize] for some extra
information and saw a :card[Torpor Orb] in my opponent's hand.

G3. I was able to resolve :card[Doomsday] and make a pile that ended with me
casting :card[Thassa's Oracle] off :card[Cavern of Souls]. Barring some
:card[Stifle] shenanigans this pile was perfect for this scenario, and now the
dream to cash the event was still alive.

#### Round 8 vs Christian Fuller on UR Delver. Win (2-0)

Well, as it turns out I was going to have to play against some hard MU in these
last rounds.

G1. This was kinda funny, both me and my opponent just mulliganed into oblivion.
My opener was 5 lands (mixed of :card[Underground Sea] and fetches)
:card[Ponder] and :card[Daze], after that I saw two hands without lands, both me
and my opponent decided to pile shuffle. I stopped at 4 and they went down to 3
cards, I kept a hand resilient to :card[Wasteland] and it could cantrip. The
hand I see after casting :card[Duress] is 3x :card[Wasteland]s. I ended up
winning this game but my opponent came really close to making up the card
disadvantage from the mulligan.

G2. I used the SB plan for Delver, and :card[Pact of Negation] really shined in
the combo turn. It felt super rewarding to win this and the previous round. This
also meant I was guaranteed to get my entry fee money back and now I was going
to play for some extra $45.

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Dragon's Rage Channeler
:::

#### Round 9 vs Michael Mapson on WG Depths. Win (2-0)

In this round I played someone who I considered to be one of the nicest people I
have met playing this game Michael Mapson. Mike hosts a podcast about Modern and
Legacy, he also has been putting really good results with this Depths variant,
by the way this is also another mu doomsday is favored. To be honest I was kinda
relieved I wouldn't have to play against Ragavan for the third time in a row.

G1. Like I said previously this is a mu Doomsday is favored, much in the same
way Doomsday is favored against Mono {G} Post but now you do have to have a plan
for :card[Endurance]. I wasn't very familiar with the stock 75 for this deck but
I suspected they weren't playing :card[Endurance] in the main deck. I cast
doomsday, Mike asked me if he was dead to which I replied “yes if you don't have
any interaction” they said “I do not”. I demonstrated to Mike the pile I was
going go make with the cards in my hand and we went to G2.

G2. I kept a hand that could combo by turn 3, and I also had a Force of Will for
any early turns disruption he could have like :card[Deafening Silence] or
hate-bears. If I remember correctly I cast a :card[Thoughtseize] on turn 2 and
discarded an :card[Endurance]. I also saw 2 :card[Knight of the Reliquary]. Mike
drew 3 extra cards with :card[Sylvan Library] over the next two turns, casts a
:card[Choke] which I countered, then I cast :card[Doomsday]. He again asked me
if he was dead, I said the same thing “yes if you don't have any interactions”
and they conceded. We talked a bit about the MU and then I was done.

#### Closing Thoughts

Ended 7-2 in the event, really enjoyed my matches, all my opponents were really
nice to interact and were very pleasant, can't wait for big events to become a
normal thing again in the future when things are safer.

### Nathan *VendillionMisclique* Anderson Stahl - 27th Place (7-2)

::decklist{path=2021/09/27/meandeck.vendillionmisclique}

> My general decision to play Doomsday for the Pit open was based on a gut
> feeling that Ragavan decks would be less popular in paper and my general
> dislike for the card. I didn't have very much experience with combo and got
> 100% of my list from Kai and followed his stream religiously over the past few
> months. Unfortunately I was wrong about my general impression of the metagame,
> there was a bunch of monkey buisness. Despite with facing some bad matchups
> and my relative inexperience as a pilot, the deck felt bonkers. One thing I
> will say is while the Bant/4C matchup feels close when I play online many of
> the pilots in this event seemed to not have a good understanding of matchup
> dynamics. Plenty of :card[Endurance]s cast at the wrong time and
> :card[Pyroblast]s burned on cantrips.

#### Round 1 vs Matt Brown on UR Delver. Loss (1-2)

This guy had :card[Snapcaster Mage]s, :card[Price of Progress], and 3
:card[Flusterstorms] in the board. I got lucky to win G1 without a real
understanding of what was going on but G2/3 were not close.

#### Round 2 vs Kevin Brenneman on Bant Control. Win (2-1)

Game one was quick. They tapped out for a t2 :card[Sylvan Library] when I had
:card[Daze] in hand, was able to go off holding up multiple pieces of
interaction. Game 2 I got smacked down by an early :card[Wasteland] x :card[Life
from the Loam] lock. I questioned if I should board out the Shelldock Emmy plan
but chose to leave it in.

This paid off in the final game where I cast :card[Duress] to see :card[Force of
Will] and multiple :card[Endurance]. I was able to play it slow with Emrakul and
won but it was close. They got two dredges to look for the one-of
:card[Wasteland].

#### Round 3 vs Mason Slate on BR Reanimator. Win (2-0)

G1 I played :card[Lotis Petal] into a :card[Chancellor of the Annex] trigger so
that I could cast discard on t1 to take an :card[Entomb]. After that they went
for an :card[Animate Dead] line on :card[Grief] to put us both hellbent, but a
2/1 doesn't do a great job as the only clock. Cantrips in the deck meant I was
able to outdraw them from there and easily win.

G2 They mulled into oblivion.

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Entomb|ODY
:::

#### Round 4 vs Jacob Saracino on UR Delver. Win (2-1)

G1 was close, they had turn 1 Ragavan and off the first cantrips I saw straight
gas. Unfortunatly I had to let them cast spells.... I avoided this once by
casting a Personal Tutor for :card[Edge of Autumn] they chose not to attack
which was odd and it ended up enabling a same turn kill.

G2 got blown away.

G3 Probably the coolest game of the tournament for me. Both of us keep 7 and do
nothing but cantrip for the first few turns. I know their hand has to be mono
interaction but at this point my opener had two :card[Pact of Negation] and I've
drawn into the full playset. We go draw go for a couple turns making land drops
at which point my hand is 4 Pact, :card[Dark Ritual], 2 Cyclers. I topdeck the
:card[Doomsday] and resolve through hardcast :card[Force of Negation], Force
pitch :card[Daze], and :card[Pyroblast] at which point they have two unkowns in
hand. I made a big punt here by putting myself dead to double :card[Daze]. I
wasn't recognizing that they had tapped out for the FON and I didn't need to
empty my library. Realised it as soon as I cast the :card[Ideas Unbound].
Thankfully they only had one :card[Daze] and I got away with one.

#### Round 5 vs Andrew Nguyen on UR Delver. Loss (1-2)

Game one was pretty masterful, same turn kill at the last possible moment to win
at one life.

G2 wasn't close.

G3 They had tapped out for :card[Delver of Secrets] and I :card[Brainstorm] into
the nuts. I resolved a :card[Doomsday] using double :card[Dark Ritual] off Petal
to :card[Duress] them first. Seeing mono cantrips :card[Force of Will] and
:card[Daze]. Had to take Force and leave them with :card[Daze] but at this point
I can't beat much. I played it too slow and lost to a Delver flip off
:card[Lightning Bolt]. In hindsight I should have waited a few turns to go off.
This exposes me to :card[Wasteland] but none of the piles I could build from
that low on resources could effectively fight an onboard threat plus
:card[Wasteland] anyhow.

#### Round 6 vs Ryan Pugh on WUGR Control. Win (2-1)

Game 1 was uneventful.

Game 2 I mull to 5 and lost to an early :card[Sylvan Library].

Game 3 was my second big punt. I didn't realize they had an onboard
:card[Karakas] tucked in with their other lands! Made a Pile that would have
lost to :card[Endurance] when I could easily have put them on 0 outs with an
:card[Ideas Unbound] that drew in to :card[Pact of Negation].

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- StP
:::

#### Round 7 vs Mark Kelley on Bant Control. Win (2-1)

G1 Not much to say here.

G2 I tried to resolve :card[Doomsday] on turn 1 with plenty of backup but they
played :card[Flusterstorm]. Given how big a blowout that play was, the game was
actually rather close. Think I put 3 copies of :card[Doomsday] on the stack
total.

Game 3 was another regrettable situation involving :card[Karakas] but this time
they played it from hand. However I only had the :card[Doomsday] in my yard and
went to cast :card[Thassa's Oracle] with one card in library to win through
:card[Endurance]. Pretty sure that they could have hardcast that
:card[Endurance] earlier to kill me...

#### Round 8 vs Stephen Dupal on Elves. Win (2-0)

G1 They played heath go. I didn't know exactly what they were on but resolved
turn 1 :card[Doomsday] with :card[Undeground Sea] and a fetch in hand. Made the
following pile to beat :card[Wasteland] + :card[Thalia, Guardian of Thraben]
over two turns.

:::row{variant=PILE}
- LED
- SW
- EoA
- TO
- Volcanic Island|LEB
:::

They knew they couldn't win and so just chose to not reveal what deck they were
on. I assumed {G}{W} depths.

G2 they :card[Thoughtseize] twice, and made in my mind a poor choice to take
:card[Dark Ritual] over a :card[Preordain] in a situation where my only other
draw spells were cyclers. The :card[Preordain] let me dig to a :card[Brainstorm]
that ended the game.

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Nettle Sentinel|EVE
:::

#### Round 9 vs Matthew Czuzak on Madness. Win (2-1)

G1 lost after playing around a topdecked :card[Burning Inquiry], they discarded
:card[Anger], :card[Vengvine] and played two Hollow Ones to kill from 10 life.

G2 I kept a super interactive hand where I was able to :card[Daze], Force the
enablers. I then drew some cantrips while they were stuck doing nothing and won
easily.

G3 Went to 5 for a hand of :card[Ponder], :card[Force of Negation], land,
:card[Dark Ritual], :card[Doomsday]. They kept a hand reliant on a turn one
:card[Faithless Looting] that I Forced. Draw land for turn and resolved
:card[Doomsday] for an easy turn 2 win.

### Nicholas *germancouch* French-Seats - 59th Place (6-3)

::decklist{path=2021/09/27/meandeck.germancouch}

> I don't have a ton of notes about each match other than what I played against
> but I'll try to recall anything notable. In terms of prep was I played at
> least one or two matches daily on cockatrice two weeks leading up to the
> tournament and Kai's stream/Youtube was super helpful in terms of learning
> lines and the thought process of the deck.

#### Round 1 vs Kyle Dorgan on Karnforge. Win (2-1)

Nothing to note here. Typical combo matchup for DD where I bought time with
counterspells to get a same turn win with Doomsday.

#### Round 2 vs Austin Blackner on UR Delver. Win (2-1)

Lost G1 due to Delver doing Delver things.

Games 2 and 3 he kept hands high on interaction but no threat which weren't
difficult to beat.

#### Round 3 vs Maximilian Sagraves on UR Delver. Win (2-0)

G1 had a quick :card[Doomsday] through :card[Force of Will]+:card[Daze] with
:card[Duress] + :card[Force of Will] backup and made a ptt (pass-the-=turn) pile
that passed twice and played around most things except something like triple
:card[Lightning Bolt] or threat + double bolt.

G2 he just kept a hand with :card[Daze] and no threat. Something of note in that
G2 that happens in paper play that you don't get online is after I Doomsday'ed
through his :card[Daze] he sort of slumped in his chair which I read as he
didn't have anything else to fight back so I went for the same turn kill in lieu
of a ptt pile. It ended up being the case that he didn't have anything but that
could have been a nutty bluff too.

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Delver of Secrets
:::

#### Round 4 vs Michael Morris on WR Painter. Win (2-0)

Both games I had some really good hands that went off quick with protection. G1
he plays :card[Ancient Den] then passes which I read as not a Force deck so I
just jammed.

G2 had counters for anything that mattered and jammed a pile that wins on the
same turn.

Outside the game note: this round had a random deck check for our table where I
got pulled aside for my list being different than the deck I was presenting. Mtg
Melee was struggling for ~36 hours up to the event including right up to the
event start so I was confident there was an issue with the site and me manually
inputting my deck. I had triple-checked the list prior to driving out to the
event and it matched up with what was in my deck so I'm not sure where/when the
mixup happened. I was able to defend my position to the judges while also being
respectful of their position and fortunately didn't get a game loss.

#### Round 5 vs Tyler Carden on ANT. Win (2-0)

Again, typical combo vs Doomsday matchup. It was interesting and fun playing
discard battles again though because you don't get to play :card[Thoughtseize] /
:card[Duress] mirrors in current legacy as much.

#### Round 6 vs Dennis Hillyer on WUGR Control. Loss (1-2)

G1 was a T2 or T3 :card[Doomsday] with backup. He had :card[Endurance] but
:card[Force of Will]+:card[Pact of Negation] was enough.

G2 I never saw a 2nd land after cantripping, Pondering twice and Brainstorming
so I was stuck on :card[Volcanic Island] the whole game and fell way behind. I
was finally able to :card[Doomsday] and make a pile that could win if my opp
egregiously misplays more than once but I messed up the chances by not piling
Emrakul 2nd so I could :card[Shelldock Isle]. First misbuilt pile of the day.

G3 was just a series of clunky draws that were enough to resolve a doomsday but
couldn't beat the :card[Pyroblast] in his hand that hit my brainstorm and left
the Emrakul stranded in my hand while he beat down with his :card[Collector
Ouphe].

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Uro, Titan of Nature's Wrath
:::

#### Round 7 vs Michael Horn on UR Delver. Loss (0-2)

This match felt like how the {U}{R} delver matchup should go. Had a ptt pile g1
that he triple bolted me out of.

G2 I had a turn that I think I could have won through but misplayed. After
cantripping + casting :card[Ideas Unbound] I had :card[Dark Ritual],
:card[Doomsday], :card[Thoughtseize], :card[Pact of Negation], :card[Street
Wraith] and :card[Pyroblast]. I :card[Thoughtseize] them and see Blast x2 and
FoW x3. I took one of the Forces but I think I should have taken one of the
Blasts. I don't remember how much mana I had open or know if there is a
same-turn winning pile post-Doomsday resolving through 1x blast+3x force with
that hand but I couldn't have beaten 2x blast with that hand anyway so I should
have taken the blast. I was in a bad spot that game anyway but I closed the door
on myself.

On the whole with the {U}{R} delver matchup it seemed as though this opp knew
how to play against Doomsday whereas my previous 2 opponents didn't have as many
reps against the deck. Keeping a hand that goes T1 Ponder and a bunch of
interaction but no early threat is a good way to lose a good matchup against
Doomsday which is what both of my previous delver opponents did.

#### Round 8 vs Anrew Arconti on Moon Stompy. Loss (0-2)

Got absolutely run over this match. It was one of those matches where stompy had
everything and can keep jamming threats+lock pieces to run you out of resources.
They had :card[Jeska's Will] in the list though which I thought was cool.

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Blood Moon
:::

#### Round 9 vs Landon Handerson on Elves. Win (2-1)

G1 I Doomsday'ed quick but punted hard but not putting :card[Ideas Unbound] in
the pile. (Pile punt count #2) That made me have to pass the turn 3 times
against Elves which is a death sentence even with a Force.

Games 2 and 3 I had T2 or T3 Doomsdays after some interaction or with
protection.

#### Closing Thoughts

Playing in a big paper tournament again was a blast and I hope to get in more
like it soon. This was easily the biggest tourney I've been in since the
pandemic started with the next closest being a 45 player modern $2k in August.
Everyone I interacted with just seemed stoked to be there. The pit staff were
also respectful in my experience. I've heard concerns from other players about
not enough precautions for a tournament this size during covid and the only
other precaution I could think to do would be follow what other
concerts/festivals are doing in requiring proof of vaccination or a negative
covid test within 72 hours at the door.

Concerning the deck, Doomsday felt like a great pick for the tourney. 9 rounds
of doomsday didn't feel that crazy from a mentally taxing standpoint and I'd
100% choose playing this deck for the next big tournament. Getting the reps in
and memorizing the majority of common piles went a long way in consolidating
mental energy throughout the tournament. Only egregiously misbuilding 2 piles in
retrospect across 9 rounds of Magic could be worse but also can be improved upon
for sure. On the note of list changes, I don't know how I feel about the
Emrakul + Shelldock plan anymore. Emrakul rotting in your hand is real bad, has
happened to me in multiple games, and Bant has been preparing for the Emrakul
plan now with :card[Karakas], :card[Dress Down], :card[Back to Basics], etc. I'm
going to cut that package from the board and see how that goes next time. The
maindeck Island was also meh in it didn't cast Doomsday and it didn't protect me
from :card[Wasteland] that much anyway when the opp can just waste my Sea and
I'm back at no black mana. Now that :card[Consider] is legal too I'm looking
forward to trying :card[Consider] + :card[Deep Analysis] which brings me to my
list changes.

Maindeck:

- Taking out the :card[Island] and replacing it with either a :card[Watery
  Grave] or the 9th fetch.
- Making room for some number of :card[Consider] + :card[Deep Analysis].
  Probably going to start with cutting :card[Preordain] + trimming some cyclers
  and see where that goes.

Sideboard:

- Cutting :card[Nausea]. Against elves I didn't seem to need it and I have
  :card[Massacre] against DnT.
- Cutting the Emrakul + Shelldock plan and going to try the double-Oracle plan
  for :card[Endurance] decks.
- Adding another :card[Pact of Negation] and a :card[Spell Pierce] into the
  remaining open slots.

### Dave *Ruta Barracuda* Boruta - 106th Place (5-4)

[Dave's Twitter](https://twitter.com/rutabarracuda)

::decklist{path=2021/09/27/meandeck.ruta-barracuda}

> The Legacy Pit Open (LPO for short) was my first Legacy tournament in over a
> year and a half. To give some background, before my daughter was born in
> March, 2020, I decided that the MTG First 2K and the Dice City Revised Open
> would be my last bits of competitive Magic for a long time. At some point
> after my daughter was born, I grinded leagues on MTGO with Meandeck Doomsday
> in the Oko meta with the older, more controlling version of Meandeck Doomsday,
> and I performed quite well with it until I had to focus more on family life.
> Up until this point, I had played Doomsday in paper only once at my local
> meta, Curio Cavern, in June of 2021, and I had not played any matches with the
> Turbo version I ran at the LPO. So, going into the week before the tournament,
> I would not have played more than 2-3 matches with Doomsday, no matches with
> the Turbo version, and a grand total of 6 matches of Legacy in 2021, period.
>
> To prepare for the tournament, I first had to decide whether I wanted to stick
> with the controlling version of Doomsday that had fallen out of favor or move
> to the turbo version. I didn't really have the time or the desire to get back
> on MTGO, so I paid close attention to what Kai Sawatari (Sawatarix), Max
> Carini (Wonderpreaux), and Ethan Formichella (Monkeyscantcry) were running.
> Max's :card[Stifle] version was very appealing to me since it appeared to
> enable an easier pivot between controlling and turbo modes of the deck, and it
> also appeared to fit better with substituting :card[Lim-Dul's Vault] for
> :card[Personal Tutor]. The choice to run :card[Lim-Dul's Vault] over
> :card[Personal Tutor] was personal preference, but I also am simply unwilling
> to spend hundreds of dollars in paper for a card that in my view only provides
> a marginal advantage over the alternative. The same decision was also made in
> designing the sideboard – I wasn't terribly enthusiastic about spending $400
> for a set of :card[Force of Negation], so with a lot of help from Max, I
> crafted a sideboard for this event that would fit well for the expected meta.
>
> When some of the Nothern VA Legacy crew got together at Bob Huang's place to
> test, I jumped at the chance to get some reps in to prepare for this
> tournament. I tested Doomsday vs. {U}{R} Ragavan Tempo matchup quite a bit
> with Dan Signorini and Kyle Pittleman, and it didn't seem as bad as I had
> imagined. It became incredibly obvious after the first couple games that going
> fast with countermagic/disruption before the Ragavan deck could establish
> itself was the way Doomsday wins the matchup.
>
> After testing and more discussion with Max, I decided on the list below for
> the LPO. I felt the slotting for boarding for the various decks that make up
> the current meta was very straightforward in this build, which was intended to
> make things easier on me during the LPO.

#### Round 1 vs Mark Marra on Jeskai Sagavan. Win (2-1)

Round 1 of the tournament began with me facing Mark Marra on Jeskai Tempo, with
me on the play. So, welcome back to Legacy – let's start with a tough matchup
right out of the gates. I was able to take Game 1 largely due to casting an
end-step :card[Lim-Dul's Vault] that spurred an exchange where my opponent cast
:card[Daze] and :card[Force of Will]. I was lucky enough to find Doomsday off
:card[Brainstorm] the following turn and already had Dark Ritual in hand. That
let me build a pile that could win through :card[Wasteland] and the active
Ragavan on board while losing to :card[Force of Will] #2 + blue card (which I
felt wasn't likely):

:::row{variant=PILE}
- SW
- Volcanic Island|LEB
- SW
- EoA
- TO
:::

**In:** :card[Cavern of Souls], 2 :card[Duress], :card[Abrade], 2
:card[Flusterstorm]  
**Out:** 4 :card[Force of Will], 2 :card[Lim-Dul's Vault]

Game 2 was very close and involved a lot of decision-making with cantrips trying
to find disruption, mana, and :card[Doomsday]. I ended up making a misplay at
one point with my cantrip decisions with Ragavan on the board, as I figured out
after the fact that I needed double :card[Daze] to win and lost one of my
:card[Daze]s to Ragavan.

Game 3, I got lucky on a mull to 4 that had a turn 1 :card[Doomsday] with
:card[Daze] backup. I decided to build a 2-turn pile that would lose to
:card[Wasteland].

:::row{variant=PILE}
- CoS
- SW
- EoA
- SW
- TO
:::

I was able to fade Wasteland and got there.

#### Round 2 vs Patrick Humfleet on WG Depths. Win (2-0)

Again, I was on the play. Game 1 was fast – an opening :card[Thoughtseize]
showed me I was clear to go for a fast kill. By turn 2, I had 2 cyclers,
:card[Dark Ritual], and :card[Doomsday] in hand with no mana floating after
Doomsday. A pile of LED, IU, :card[Lotus Petal], :card[Pact of Negation],
:card[Thassa's Oracle] enabled the same turn win with 2 cyclers in hand.

:::row{variant=PILE}
- LED
- IU
- LP
- PoN
- TO
:::

**In:** :card[Echoing Truth], 2 :card[Abrade]  
**Out:** 2 :card[Thoughtseize], :card[Preordain]

Game 2, my opponent and I both mulled to 6, and my opponent came out with a plan
to just race me with a fast Marit Lage. This is one game where :card[Lim-Dul's
Vault] found me a win where :card[Personal Tutor] wouldn't. By Patrick's third
end-step, he had assembled the combo. I cast :card[Lim-Dul's Vault] then,
holding :card[Brainstorm], cycler, and :card[Lotus Petal], and land in hand.
After paying 10 life (so looking through practically my entire deck!) I was able
to find a Vault pile that would win the game for me in :card[Stifle],
:card[Doomsday], cycler, :card[Dark Ritual], X. On my turn, I drew :card[Stifle]
and passed to my end step, where I cast :card[Stifle] on :card[Thespian's Stage]
activation. In Patrick's end step, I cast :card[Brainstorm] and put cycler and
land on top. On my turn, I drew the 2nd cycler and won using the same pile as
game 1.

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Dark Depths|CSP
:::

#### Round 3 vs Anthony Arevalo on Jeskai Sagavan. Loss (1-2)

Anthony is a regular at Dice City Games, the other store in the DC Metro Area
that has a highly competitive Legacy meta, and I recognized his playmat and
vaguely recognized him under his mask from monthly tournaments at DC Games.

Game 1 was quite strange, in that Anthony never fetched a red source, only
:card[Tundra]s, presumably to hide what he was on; we exchanged :card[Stifle]s
on fetches and :card[Wasteland], and I eventually found the combo with
disruption in the form of :card[Thoughtseize] and :card[Force of Will] backup to
win with a pass the turn pile using :card[Ideas Unbound].

**In:** :card[Cavern of Souls], 2 :card[Duress], :card[Abrade], 2
:card[Flusterstorm]  
**Out:** 4 :card[Force of Will], 2 :card[Lim-Dul's Vault]

I remember Game 2 being a slog, with us again trading :card[Stifle]s on
fetches/:card[Wasteland], my having to deal with an initial Ragavan with
:card[Abrade] out of the sideboard. This was followed up by Anthony with a
second continuously *dashed* Ragavan that I was unable to deal with. I made a
critical mistake with my cantrip decisions at this point that cost me the game,
as I piled my :card[Ponder]s incorrectly twice – the first, giving away a land I
actually would have needed, and the second giving up a :card[Daze] that I
originally thought would have had no impact, but after I saw Anthony using his
Ragavan Treasures right away and was tapping out each turn, meant having double
:card[Daze] would likely have won me the match. So, by the time I was able to
cast :card[Doomsday] and win the same turn, I was at 1 life, meaning I lost the
game.

Game 3 was low impact from my side – I was able to disrupt with an early
:card[Stifle] into a follow-up :card[Duress] to buy time, but my cantrips simply
kept hitting more discard and air rather than finding me :card[Doomsday]. By the
time I was able to find :card[Doomsday], Anthony had stabilized and started
finding :card[Wasteland]s and threats to quickly diminish my life total.

#### Round 4 vs Bryant Cook on TES. Loss (0-2)

Bryant was a friendly face in the tournament and one of the many players I was
hoping to be able to play with that I used to have great games with on MTGO. We
both knew what each other was playing; I was very familiar with Bryant's entire
list, and I was pretty sure Bryant knew I was on Max's :card[Stifle] version of
Doomsday from our chats before the tournament that day. I would like to have
said I played these games as well as I could, but that wouldn't be true. The
problem with not having played much Magic at all for over a year is that you
start feeling fatigued earlier in a tournament than you would have if you were
keeping up playing. This was probably my worst played match of the day. As a
result, it's also the match I remember the best, since I have thought about how
I could have played it better since then.

Game 1, I kept a slow hand of :card[Ponder], 2x :card[Force of Will],
:card[Street Wraith], Fetchland, Fetchland, and was on the play. Against any
other deck and player, I would have said this would have been a fine keep.
Against Bryant on TES, I should have looked for a faster combo hand, since that
is how :card[Doomsday] wins the Storm matchup. I opened with fetching for an
:card[Underground Sea] and cast :card[Ponder] – I believe I shuffled that
:card[Ponder] and drew :card[Lotus Petal]. Bryant had a very fast start as
expected and was able to play out much of his mana as expected and cast
:card[Ponder]. On my turn, I drew :card[Brainstorm] and cast it to find another
:card[Brainstorm], a second :card[Street Wraith], and a land – no second blue
card to hold up double FoW. I put :card[Lotus Petal] and Land back on top and
played out a second fetchland. Bryant cast :card[Wishclaw Talisman] on his turn,
which I attempted to counter with :card[Force of Will] (pitching
:card[Brainstorm]). He responded with :card[Veil of Summer], which I had
expected to happen. I cracked the fetch to get a shuffle and felt good about
playing to my outs with two :card[Street Wraith]s in hand. With Veil on the
stack, I cycled the first :card[Street Wraith], which drew another :card[Street
Wraith]. I then cycled the remaining two into cards that were not blue, and I
lost the match to natural Tendrils off the Wishclaw. One note is that if I had
let Wishclaw resolve, Bryant had enough mana on board to be able to kill me
through an :card[Ad Nauseam] line with ease, so the Wishclaw was a must counter
with the expectation that I would also have to counter a :card[Veil of Summer]
in response.

**In:** 2 :card[Duress], 2 :card[Flusterstorm]  
**Out:** 2 :card[Pact of Negation], 2 :card[Lim-Dul's Vault]

In Game 2, Bryant mulled to 6 while I mulled to 5 – :card[Stifle], :card[Force
of Will], :card[Flusterstorm], :card[Street Wraith], :card[Underground Sea]. Not
ideal, workable. Unfortunately, I played this game horribly. I started by
cycling :card[Street Wraith] to find a cantrip, but hit another land instead. I
played out the :card[Underground Sea] and passed. Bryant has a less explosive
start with fetch, pass. I draw :card[Doomsday], play out my second land and pass
for turn. Bryant led his turn on :card[Brainstorm], then played a Taiga
(representing Veil in my mind) then played out Petal, LED, and :card[Mox Opal]
into :card[Wishclaw Talisman]. At this point in game 2, I should have been
playing more patiently, but I decided to go with a high risk, high reward play
that in retrospect was a poor decision made out of a feeling of desperation from
being on a mull to 5 – I was going to make a bluff to try to steal Bryant's
Wishclaw from him by letting it resolve (thus representing I didn't :card[Force
of Will] even when I did) because he had two cards left in hand at that point by
my counting. One would be presumably :card[Veil of Summer], and the other
potentially :card[Dark Ritual]. So, when Bryant cast :card[Veil of Summer], I
responded with :card[Flusterstorm] – perhaps too quickly. I was surprised when
he stopped right there, although after reading his tournament report, I can see
why he stopped now. Next turn, I drew a third land, which was unexpected. I
quickly played it, and I figured at that point, that was my window to try to go
for a win by casting :card[Doomsday] and building a fastest-killing
pass-the-turn pile I could while holding up :card[Force of Will] on Bryant's
turn.

:::row{variant=PILE}
- IU
- EoA
- Underground Sea|LEB
- TO
- Island|RAV
:::

What I should have thought more carefully about was the possibility of Bryant
having :card[Echo of Eons] in hand, which he did and led on the following turn.
Now my problem was my pile, while drawn if I survived a turn would win me the
match, was not built to handle an Echo of Eons and could only counter one spell,
assuming I drew :card[Force of Will] in my fresh 7. I should have let it resolve
anyway, but I instead countered it, and that exact amount of life loss let
Bryant kill me with a natural Tendrils. It was a huge misplay, but I also played
that whole game incredibly poorly.

I talked with both Max and Romario after the match about Game 2 specifically,
and they had different takes. Max was of the opinion that I did have to go for a
:card[Doomsday] there because I was so far behind, but I should have jam packed
my pile with counter magic and that way let :card[Echo of Eons] resolve to keep
Bryant off the win. Romario was of the opposite opinion, that I should have
waited, since I had the ability to :card[Force of Will] or :card[Stifle] and
could potentially draw into a same turn kill. After the match, Bryant and I also
talked a little about game 2, and he shared Max's opinion that I should have let
:card[Echo of Eons] resolve and counter the payoff spells post-Echo. It's a
tough choice, either way, but I think in the end that Romario was right and I
should have waited to cast Doomsday.

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Wishclaw Talisman
:::

#### Round 5 vs Kyle Souza on UR Delver. Loss (1-2)

I was on the draw and kept a slow 6, not knowing what Kyle was on. I can't
recall exactly what my hand was Game 1, other than I had :card[Force of Will],
land, and multiple cantrips. I opened with fetch for :card[Underground Sea],
:card[Ponder], which I shuffled, and passed. I recall Kyle opening on a DRC. On
the following turns, I spun my wheels while getting Wastelanded out of the game.
By the time I recovered, Kyle had Delerium turned on with DRC, eventually
flipped a Delver, and was able to close the game out with a series of burn
spells.

**In:** :card[Cavern of Souls], 2 :card[Duress], :card[Abrade], 2
:card[Flusterstorm]  
**Out:** 4 :card[Force of Will], 2 :card[Lim-Dul's Vault]

Game 2, I kept a really fast 7 that consisted of :card[Volcanic Island], Fetch,
Fetch, :card[Dark Ritual], :card[Doomsday], :card[Stifle], :card[Daze]. I
couldn't ask for a better 7 against Delver. Kyle mulled to 6. I went turn 1
playing my fetchland and passed. On Kyle's turn, I cast :card[Stifle] on his
fetchland. On my turn, I drew another :card[Daze]. I played the other fetchland,
cracked it for :card[Underground Sea], cast :card[Dark Ritual] into
:card[Doomsday], and passed with the following pile:

:::row{variant=PILE}
- IU
- EoA
- LP
- TO
- CoS
:::

Kyle untapped, played another fetchland, cast :card[Ponder], and passed. I cast
:card[Ideas Unbound], played :card[Lotus Petal], cycled into Cavern on Merfolk,
and cast an uncounterable :card[Thassa's Oracle] for the win.

Game 3, I was on a mull to 5, but found a quick hand of Fetchland, :card[Dark
Ritual], :card[Doomsday], :card[Daze].  
I drew into a second :card[Daze] after Kyle opened with :card[Volcanic Island]
into :card[Delver of Secrets]. On my turn, I cracked the fetch for
:card[Underground Sea], cast :card[Dark Ritual] into :card[Doomsday]. I built a
pile to beat :card[Wasteland] but would require fading 2 turns:

:::row{variant=PILE}
- Polluted Delta|ONS
- EoA
- TO
- CoS
- Volcanic Island|LEB
:::

Unfortunately, that didn't matter – Kyle revealed :card[Brainstorm] to flip
Delver, played :card[Volcanic Island]
#2, then attacked with Delver. He cast :card[Lightning Bolt], which I Dazed and he Dazed back, then he cast
:card[Lightning Bolt] #2 for the win.

#### Round 6 vs Michael Fajardo Evangelista on Elves. Win (2-0)

I lost the die roll and saw an opener of Yavimaya into :card[Quirion Ranger].
Elves is generally a favorable matchup assuming I can race game 1, which I
could. I had mulled to a 6 that had land, land, :card[Dark Ritual], cantrip,
LDV, :card[Daze] I drew into :card[Ponder], and cast it turn 1, finding
:card[Doomsday]. The following turn, Michael cast :card[Nettle Sentinel] and
another :card[Quirion Ranger]. I untapped, drew into a blank, played a land and
cast :card[Doomsday]. I made a cycler pile into :card[Thassa's Oracle]. Next
turn, Michael tried to find a way to go off by leading on :card[Elvish
Visionary], which I Dazed to win game 1 when I untapped.

**In:** 2 :card[Flusterstorm], 2 :card[Duress]  
**Out:** 4 :card[Daze]

Game 2, I kept a 6 that I think was :card[Flusterstorm], :card[Thoughtseize],
:card[Dark Ritual], :card[Underground Sea], fetchland, and :card[Doomsday]. I
remember Michael also mulling to 6 and leading on :card[Thoughtseize]. The
following turn, I Thoughtseized back, seeing he had a slow hand. I took his
:card[Elvish Visionary] and passed. On his turn, Michael played out some of the
1-drop creatures from his hand and passed. On my turn, I cast :card[Brainstorm]
and drew into :card[Doomsday], :card[Lotus Petal], and a :card[Volcanic Island].
I cast :card[Dark Ritual] into :card[Doomsday] off the fetched :card[Underground
Sea] and built the below pile.

:::row{variant=PILE}
- IU
- Stifle
- LP
- EoA
- TO
:::

I ended up not needing the :card[Stifle], since my opponent couldn't find a
:card[Glimpse of Nature] or :card[Natural Order].

#### Round 7 vs Zach Felix on Elves. Win (2-1)

Game 1 went in my favor rather quickly, despite being on the Draw. I kept a six
that had :card[Dark Ritual], :card[Daze], :card[Lim-Dul's Vault],
:card[Underground Sea], Fetch, :card[Ponder]. Zach opened with :card[Quirion
Ranger] turn 1. Back to back Elves felt like a boon after facing 3 Ragavan decks
earlier in the tournament. I played :card[Underground Sea] and cast
:card[Ponder] to find a :card[Force of Will]. Zach's second turn involved
playing a :card[Quirion Ranger] and :card[Nettle Sentinel]. I played a fetch and
passed. Zach didn't draw any engine cards, so he played a couple more creatures
and swung for a few points of damage. In his end step, I cast :card[Lim-Dul's
Vault] and found :card[Doomsday] right away. When I untapped, I cast
:card[Doomsday] and made a cycler pile. The following turn, Zach didn't topdeck
a win, so I was able to cast :card[Thassa's Oracle] without issue the following
turn.

**In:** 2 :card[Flusterstorm], 2 :card[Duress]  
**Out:** 4 :card[Daze]

Game 2 was much more interactive. Zach kept his 7, and I think I mulled to 6
again that had a turn 1 :card[Dark Ritual] into :card[Doomsday] with no backup,
but had cantrips. Zach opened on :card[Thoughtseize], taking :card[Doomsday],
leaving me to have to dig. Zach continued building his board turn 2 and ran his
Grist into a :card[Daze] while I found nothing off my :card[Brainstorm], leaving
me with blue card and :card[Street Wraith] in hand. By turn 3, Zach got the
Glimpse engine online and drew into :card[Craterhoof Behemoth], which cast that
same turn. I cracked my fetchland to clear the top of my library, then cycled
with :card[Street Wraith] playing to my outs for a :card[Force of Will], which I
did not draw.

Game 3, I kept a strong 7 that, with cantrips, got me to a turn 2
:card[Doomsday] with :card[Force of Will] backup. At this point, my memory is a
bit fuzzy, but I think Zach mulled twice. It didn't end up mattering, but I
misbuilt my :card[Doomsday] pile to be a pass-the-turn where I had one blue mana
open. I likely could have built a pile of :card[Brainstorm] (cycler in hand),
LED, cycler, TO, X, X. It would have left me open to :card[Endurance], though,
so I decided to go with the below pile to hold up :card[Force of Will] on
:card[Endurance] (which he didn't have in hand) to win.

:::row{variant=PILE}
- Pnd
- IU
- Underground Sea|LEB
- LP
- TO
:::

#### Round 8 vs Juanmanuel Angulo on Ninjas. Win (2-1)

Game 1, we both kept 7's. At this point in the tournament, I honestly couldn't
recall what my 7 was, other than it had FoW, cantrips, :card[Dark Ritual], and
land. My opponent opened to :card[Underground Sea], :card[Ponder], pass. So at
first I thought I was in a combo mirror. I cast a :card[Ponder] on my turn as
well. My opponent cast another cantrip and then played out :card[Ornithopter].
Ok, I'm facing :card[Ninjas] - not a great matchup, actually kinda bad. On my
turn, I find the combo and set up a pass the turn pile with :card[Ideas
Unbound]. My opponent ninjitsus in Yuriko on his turn and hits me for a decent
amount, but not enough to keep me from winning the following turn.

**In:** :card[Cavern of Souls], 2 :card[Duress], :card[Red Elemental Blast],
:card[Pyroblast], :card[Flusterstorm]  
**Out:** 4 :card[Force of Will], 2 :card[Lim-Dul's Vault]

Game 2, I mulled to a quick 6, and my opponent also mulled to 6. He opened with
:card[Thoughtseize] taking :card[Doomsday], then played out 2
:card[Ornithopter]s. My cantrips were unable to find another :card[Doomsday] in
the following turns, meaning I quickly died to a board of ninjas.

Game 3, I kept a slower 7 that was full of disruption. My opponent mulled to 5.
I opened on :card[Thoughtseize], taking his :card[Force of Will]. He played out
his two :card[Ornithopter]s and passed. On my turn, I cantripped to find
:card[Doomsday] and left mana open to :card[Stifle] ninjitsu, which I did the
following turn. My next draw was a :card[Red Elemental Blast], which I used on
Yuriko the next time it entered the battlefield. When I untapped, I found the
third land for Doomsday, had Cavern in hand, and made a cycler pile that won me
the match the following turn.

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
- Changeling Outcast
:::

#### Round 9 vs Daniel McCaulley on Urza Echo ft. Painter Transformation. Loss (1-2)

Game 1 was weird - I kept a 7 that just needed me to find :card[Dark Ritual] and
I had :card[Force of Will] backup. My opponent started out fast into an Emry
that whiffed. The next turn, I find the ritual and immediately cast
:card[Doomsday], making a cycler pile to cast :card[Thassa's Oracle] with
:card[Force of Will] backup. My opponent spins his wheels the following turn,
not top decking well.

**In:** 2 :card[Abrade], :card[Red Elemental Blast], :card[Pyroblast],
:card[Cavern of Souls], 2 :card[Flusterstorm], 2 :card[Duress], :card[Echoing
Truth]  
**Out:** 2 :card[Stifle], 2 :card[Pact of Negation], 2 :card[Lim-Dul's
Vault], 2 :card[Street Wraith], 2 :card[Lotus Petal]

Game 2, we both mull to 6. My opponent opens with :card[Painter's Servant]
naming {W}, which is not what I want to see with a grip full of Red Blasts and
cantrips. On my turn, I draw :card[Force of Will] and play a fetch land. My
opponent casts :card[Grindstone] on his turn, which is met with :card[Force of
Will] from me. He forces back, I Red Blast his force, and he Forces again. The
next time he untaps, I lose.

Game 3, I mull to 5 looking for a quick :card[Doomsday], which I don't find.
Instead, I have :card[Abrade], Petal, Fetch, Cantrip, :card[Dark Ritual]. I
cantrip turn 1 and shuffle to draw :card[Street Wraith]. My opponent plays turn
1 Painter. Turn 2, I attempt to :card[Abrade] and am met with :card[Force of
Will]. From there, the game gets away from me as my opponent plays :card[Urza's
Saga] and finds :card[Grindstone] off it over the next couple turns while I
cantrip and find nothing good.

#### Closing Thoughts

Playing Doomsday in paper felt just as easy as online to me, except I found
myself choosing piles quicker to not get accused of stalling or slow play; not
that I found cause to feel that way in this tournament. I do think, though, that
there were several instances where I would have made better decisions if those
same games had been played on MTGO because I would be able to talk myself
through those lines out loud - something one really can't do in paper.

I would say the weirdest part of playing Doomsday in paper was using copies from
Weatherlight and having to explain the Oracle text was updated to sequence
resolution differently starting in 6th edition. I was asked the same thing about
:card[Lim-Dul's Vault] and struggled to explain the changes, even though at this
point I knew how it is supposed to resolve from playing it on MTGO. I suggested
we call a judge to get the Oracle text, but my opponent declined and said he was
just curious.

Overall, I was happy to have gone 5-4 after playing almost no Magic at all since
October 2020, although it is clear to me I could have played better and may have
finished better if I had played sharper/tighter. I felt that the
Doomsday/Ragavan Tempo matchup is much closer than I had expected it to be,
though I do feel like I have Dan and Kyle to thank for quickly bringing me up to
speed on that matchup. I think that overall, the deck is still well-positioned
in this meta. It's not quite as well-positioned as it was in the Oko meta, but I
would say it is still the top combo deck. The Legacy Pit meta showed Doomsday
coming out to a 54% win rate (thanks to Jesse Hatfield for analysis), which was
right in the same ballpark as the Ragavan decks. Also, after the tournament,
Alex Rubin posted that he saw :card[Torpor Orb] a lot out of his opponents'
sideboards, validating my choice to run :card[Abrade], even if I dodged
:card[Torpor Orb] myself. So overall, I think my deck choice was solid, as were
my sideboard card choices.

After the tournament, I got some barbecue in Frederick with some of my NoVA and
RVA friends. The food was pretty good, and it felt a bit surreal that we were
able to go have dinner with friends after playing Magic all day. It was honestly
great getting to play Legacy in paper again and great to hang out with old
friends. The Legacy Pit put on a great tournament, and I felt safe with the mask
enforcement. I look forward to being able to do this in the future.

## One Last Consider'ation

And there we have it! A big thank-you to all our contributors who submitted
reports for this article. As I said there were 11 players for Doomsday overall
and it's great to see so many choosing it for such a big event.

One final thing to note is the Wiki has now been updated with instructions on
how to integrate :card[Consider] into your pile building. For those unaware
:card[Consider] is a new card which allows for a couple of things. First of all
it allows existing :card[Brainstorm] + Cycler + X piles or {U} + Cycler Piles +
X piles to now go down to 0 cards left in deck.

> {U} + Brainstorm + Street Wraith + X

:::row{variant=PILE}
- LP
- LED
- EoA
- Consider
- TO
:::

1. Cycle SW, draw the LP and cast it
1. Cast Brainstorm off of LP and put back X then Consider
1. Cast LED, cycle SW cracking LED for {U}{U}{U} and draw the Consider
1. Cast Consider, put X into the graveyard and draw TO
1. Cast TO with the remaining mana from LED with zero cards left in your library

This also allowss you to create very mana/card efficient piles with the help of
:card[Deep Analysis]. If you have {U} and either :card[Consider] or a cycler in
hand you can build the following:

> {U} + Consider

:::row{variant=PILE}
- DA
- LED
- SW
- LP
- TO
:::

1. Cast Consider, surveil the DA and draw LED.
1. Cast LED, crack it for {U}{U}{U} and flashback DA to draw SW and LP
1. Cycle SW, draw the TO
1. Cast LP and cast TO with the LP and the final {U} from the LED with zero
   cards left in your library

For the cycler variant just remove the SW from the pile and put :card[Consider]
on the top.

We will of course try to update other content including default decklists and
relevant interactions when we have time/enough data to do so.

## Closing Thoughts

If you haven't yet, please feel free to watch / listen to the interview with
Romario that can be found linked at the top of the page. feel free to judge my
(Doishy's) first attempt at sound editing!

The final thanks to all the players who submitted to this article. We love
seeing other people in the community get involved with content creation so if
you would like to get involved or have an idea for an article or series please
let us know!

As always if you want even more content please check out our
[resources](/appendices/resources) page which includes a list of community
streamers or maybe if you are up for a challenge maybe check out the
[puzzles](/puzzles) page.

If you would like to submit any content to the Wiki then please contact
AngryBacon in the [Doomsday Discord](https://discord.gg/vajvFXt) or contact
Doishy on the Discord if you wish to discuss anything mentioned in the article
further.

Until next time.

Keep up the good work all!
