---
authors: drynne
order: 3
title: Playing Around Interaction
---

## Table of Contents

## Preamble

In general, the easiest way to play around interaction is using discard and
countermagic. However, because the core of the Tin Fins combo is Instant speed,
there are a number of ways to play around different pieces interaction on the
stack without those effects.

By playing patiently and knowing when to go for your combo, you can steal wins
that would potherwise be missed.

## Comboing at Instant Speed

Because the Tin Fins combo is Instant speed, you are able to combo off in
response to interaction or hate, in response to your opponent's combo, or even
in your opponents end step.

For example, a common line when playing against control decks is to combo in
their endstep or in response to their cantrips and flash creatures. This dodges
pitch-cast :card[Force of Negation] and allows you to draw 14 cards. This level
of card advantage is nearly insurmountable for the control player in most
situations and sets you up for the win on your turn.

## Removal

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
StP
Solitude | MH2
Karakas
:::

Tin Fins is able to play around removal on Griselbrand fairly easily. Most
players will wait until you activate Griselbrand the first time before casting a
removal spell. Because of this, you can usually activate Griselbrand a second
time to find a piece of countermagic to answer the removal spell.

If you're unable to counter the removal, such as Karakas, it is still correct to
draw as many cards as possible before it resolves. Generally, drawing 14 cards
is enough to allow you to combo again in the same turn, as discussed in the
[Playing the Deck](/entombsday/gameplay) section.

## Graveyard Hate

### Leyline Effects

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Leyline of the Void
Rest in Peace
Dauthi Voidwalker
:::

These effects are the primary reason we play the Doomsday transformation in the
sideboard. Nothing feels better than your opponent mulling to two or three for a
Leyline of the Void and casting Dark Ritual into Doomsday on your turn.

While Leyline of the Void and Rest in Peace are functionally blank cards against
the Doomsday plan, Dauthi Voidwalker still poses a threat. Because Dauthi
Voidwalker allows the opponent to cast cards exiled with it, you'll need to be
careful about what cards you cast, discard and mill. Notably, this affects piles
using :card[Consider] when the card being milled could be useful to the
opponent: Force of Will, Daze, Flusterstorm, or even Emrakul, the Aeons Torn.

### Cards that Empty the Graveyard

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Bojuka Bog
Endurance
Faerie Macabre
:::

Cards like Bojuka Bog, Endurance, and Faerie Macabre are some of the easiest to
play around for Tin Fins. The general play pattern to beat these effects is to
_bin_ your Griselbrand, bait the interaction with a Shallow Grave, then simply
cast a second copy of Entomb (or crack LED) to bin another Griselbrand after the
effect resolves.

Note that Shallow Grave is required here, as it does not target a specific card.

### Surgical Extraction

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Surgical Extraction
:::

While similar to the previously mentioned effects, Surgical Extraction requires
the inverse play pattern. Since Surgical Extraction exiles all copies of the
chosen card, you can't allow it to resolve. To beat these effects, you will need
two reanimation effects instead of two Entomb effects is you're unable to just
counter the spell.

In this scenario, you can bait the Surgical using the first reanimation spell,
then you can respond to Surgical with the second. Things can get weird if they
have two copies of Surgical, but you also run discard spells and countermagic,
so you can use those to force them to Surgical before you cast your reanimation
or just counter their Surgical.

## Other Hate

### Teferi, Time Raveler

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Teferi, Time Raveler
:::

:card[Teferi, Time Raveler] is an annoying, but not necessarily difficult, card
for Tin Fins to play around as it turns off our ability to reanimate Emrakul.
The first option is to agressively discard or counter it. If those are not an
option then the best available line is to reanimate Griselbrand as normal, go to
combat and attack your opponent, the proceed with looping your deck to either
hard cast Emrakul or loop Collective Brutality.

Post-board, keep in mind that this effect turns off :card[Shelldock Isle], so
avoid piles using that effect if your opponent is playing Teferi.

### Narset, Parter of Veils and Hullbreacher

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Narset, Parter of Veils
Spirit of the Labyrinth
Hullbreacher
:::

Resolved Narset, Spirit of the Labyrinth, and Hullbreacher effects are likely
the most difficult non-graveyard hate for Tin Fins to beat. By turning off our
ability to draw cards with Griselbrand, these effects disable most of what makes
this gameplan powerful. Generally the best way to beat these effects is to never
let them resolve in the first place. These are high priority targets for discard
and must-counter spells when cast.

If you're not able to answer them preemptively, the next best option is to combo
off with them still on the stack or remove them, generally through combat, after
the fact. For Narset, you are able to just attack into her, then proceed with
one of the deck loops to win the game. For Hullbreacher, you'll need your
opponent to attack with it so you can ambush it in combat with a Griselbrand.
Alternatively, you can just reanimate Emrakul and ignore these effects if your
opponent is at a low enough life total or you have the ability to combo again
naturally.

### Containment Priest

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Containment Priest
:::

Although it does not see much play currenty outside of the sideboard of Death
and Taxes, :card[Containment Priest] completely disables the Tin Fins combo.
Because of this, we almost always transform into Doomsday in post-board games
against Death and Taxes.
