###### Pre Doomsday

Playing a longer game against a deck with strong pressure and heavy protection
has always been really hard, but now with the snowballing nature of Ragavan it's
even harder to set up a safe kill. You just do not have the time to dig through
your deck to find the right pieces.

Ragavan is a very dominating factor in this matchup. It disrupts your own plans,
by stealing your cards, and supports their gameplan by dealing damage and
accumulating resources. Your main goal, after setting up Doomsday, should be
keeping the impact of the monkey as low as possible, either by feeding it *bad*
cards or by resolving a Doomsday before it even has the chance to snowball.

When mulliganing, keep in mind :card[Daze] can be invalidated very fast by
:card[Ragavan, Nimble Pilferer] and every cantrip has to hit something good or
you'll fall behind very fast. Hands with turn 1 Doomsday are always great,
especially on the play. After MH2 many Delver players cut some :card[Force of
Negation], making our turn 1 Doomsdays a lot safer.

Against the current Izzet Delver lists :card[Force of Will] got a lot worse,
because it's very resource intensive and we rather prefer to keep the cards we
would pitch to it for wins without passing the turn post Doomsday. To fight this
problem many Doomsday lists play :card[Pact of Negation], because it's less
resource intensive and supports wins without passing the turn.

###### Post Doomsday

The post Doomsday game against UR Delver is very tricky. You often have to take
risks to resolve Oracle without giving the Delver player too much time to look
for answers or straight up kill you with damage.

Of course you would prefer to always build [Brainstorm
piles](/meandeck/brainstorm) and never pass the turn, but that's not always
possible. Here comes the ugly part, you can't beat everything a Delver deck
possibly has. Even with stock lists. You'll have to learn how to assess the
situation and plan accordingly. That's an important skill in every matchup, but
against Delver it's crucial.

When building fast pass the turn piles, :card[Lion's Eye Diamond] will be your
best friend. The 3 free mana are often very helpful to cast Oracle without
having to put multiple lands in your pile.

A little trick to play through an opposing Ragavan post Doomsday is to put a
cycler on top of your pile. It's not a loss when the monkey steals it, but you
are also happy to draw it and you can use it to dig deeper or control better
what Ragavan steals next.
