<!-- markdownlint-disable first-line-heading -->

###### Pre Doomsday

Overall Esper Vial is not a very fast deck. It needs some time to set up
pressure. Most of its cards try to accumulate value and overwhelm you in the
long run. In game 1 Esper Vial shoudln't be a huge problem. Yes, it plays
:card[Force of Will] and :card[Teferi, Time Raveler], but if you can put
Doomsday on the stack before turn 3 you should have no problem resolving it. One
counterspell is enough to push through most of the time. Daze is especially good
in the matchup because they have to use their mana in their early turns to play
to the board, similarly to Death and Taxes.

Due to its _toolbox_ nature, you can expect various threats from your opponent
but mostly in the form of hatebears. Cards like :card[Meddling Mage] will slow
you down by naming Doomsday itself.

Post-board many Esper Vial lists board in 4 :card[Force of Negation]. They are
still not a control deck, but now we need resources to beat at least 2 Forces.
As a general advice, their mana can be very shaky, so preventing them from
setting up an Aether Vial doesn't just save you from uncounterable Meddling
Mages but can also disrupt their whole gameplan. No Vial also forces them to
play out Plains to enable their most important cards.

###### Post Doomsday

Your gameplan after resolving Doomsday is very dependent on pressure and their
possibilities to set up hatebears. If they have no pressure you can build a very
slow pile and keep your removal and counterspells ready for the important
threats and hatebears. In games where the pressure is already high when you
resolve Doomsday, you either have to heavily rely on mass removal like
:card[Massacre], or build a really fast pile and take some risks.

A small but important hint: when your opponent keeps up 4 Mana or has a vial on
4 be wary of :card[Venser, Shaper Savant]. It can bounce your oracle from the
stack even when it's cast with Cavern of Souls.
