<!-- markdownlint-disable first-line-heading -->

Welcome to the Doomsday Wiki!

The Doomsday Wiki is intended to be the most complete and up to date work on how
to cast the card named Doomsday in the Legacy format of _Magic: the Gathering_.

There is actually much more to how to play the deck, but understanding how to
cast the namesake card of the deck is a pretty big piece of the puzzle. This is
specifically not a _primer_ as you often see for other decks in Legacy, because
primers generally become outdated rather quickly and are more about card
choices, decklists, sideboard plans, and so on. The Doomsday Wiki is there to
help people to really understand how the deck works and can win in various
scenarios.

We have three main variants represented on here that you can access resources
for on the left hand sidebar.

**Doomsday** is the primary deck variant that is having previously unprecedented
success since the printing of :card[TO]. Legacy Doomsday uses countermagic like
Force of Will and discard like Duress to play a controlling game before ending
the game.

**DDFT** (Doomsday Fetchland Tendrils) is the closest to historical lists.
Although it adopts the current usage of Thassa's Oracle these decks tend to also
have access to secondary Storm plans using cards like :card[BW], :card[EoE] and
:card[ToA]. They also prefer proactive protection like discard over being able
to run reactive countermagic.

**DDEFT** (Doomsday Experimental Frenzy Tendrils) is now an outdated style. This
was the main variant available post Gitaxian Probe ban and pre-printing of
Thassa's Oracle. These lists use :card[EF] as a card advantage engine
and win condition in tandem with Doomsday.

**Entombsday** is a Tin Fins variant with a main deck plan focusing on
reanimating Griselbrand using either :card[Shallow Grave] or :card[Goryo's
Vengeance] to then have it attack alongside :card[Em] or looping the deck to
generate infinite mana and hard cast Emrakul or cast Collective Brutality an
infinite number of times. The key point to focus on is it runs a dedicated
transformational sideboard into a variant of Doomsday.

If you are new to the archetype then check out the [FAQs Appendix][faq] for any
initial queries you might have. Peruse the Wiki, read some of the articles and
come visit us in the [Discord][discord].

[faq]: /appendices/faq
[discord]: https://discord.gg/vajvFXt
