---
authors: d8dk32
banner: /assets/tendrils-of-agony.scg.jpg
title: DDFT Brews for 2021
---

Like many Legacy players who are dedicated to their deck, I am constantly iterating, adjusting, and refining my lists. Since I'm a DDFT holdout, I have to work extra hard to make my deck even moderately playable compared to those more *normal* Doomsday players. This means I'm very open to trying unsual (read: bad) ideas in case I find the next piece of sick tech. It's rare that this actually happens, but even failed brews can leave behind valuable morsels, which may with luck accumulate into something playable. So, dear reader, let me take you on a journey through the dark corners of the Doomsday discord, where suboptimal decks skitter in the shadows, and the few remaining DDFT players, guant and starving, make their home. We'll see some examples of failures, examine the useful scraps, and talk about what I think is the best list right now for someone who wants to play Doomsday and Tendrils of Agony in the same 75. 

## The Starting Point

<row variant="centered">{{!DD}} {{!EoE}} {{!BW}}</row>

This is roughly what I and others would consider a typical DDFT list in the present day. It has undergone some changes since [my original Echo Doomsday article](https://ddft.wiki/articles/2020/01/01/echoes-of-the-past/) but is more or less recognizable.

<deck path="2021/07/CurrentDDFT.txt" />

The biggest change of course is the adoption of Thassa's Oracle which hadn't been printed when that article was published. But there are other refinements as well, most of which are also driven by the printing of oracle. Street Wraith and Ideas Unbound instead of the Draw4's are primarily to facilitate Oracle piles, especially pass-the-turn piles. There's also a reduced number of rituals and more cantrips for consistency, encouraged by the reduced reliance on black mana. Clearly, Thassa's Oracle caused a substantial shift in the Doomsday world, even for those of us trying to Storm off.

I still think this list is a very reasonable option, and a good place to start for someone looking to venture over to the DDFT side. That said, there were a few aspects of it that I didn't like, which drove me to continue iterating. The biggest was the manabase. Because of the Echoes, discard can't be the only form of protection. Veil of Summer, or perhaps Silence, seemed to be the best option, but both necessitate a four color manabase. TES manages this due to Mox Opal, but our artifact count isn't high enough to support it. So we're forced to play a slightly sketchy manabase, which makes fetching tricky and ups the impact of Wastelands and Stifles. Defense grid is perhaps an option, but in testing I was unimpressed. Too often, it would resolve on turn 2, or turn 3 to dodge Daze, and the opponent could pay 3 to Force a business spell anyway. While these issues weren't catastrophic, and careful fetching could minimize it, I was nonetheless driven to explore other options. Over the course of 2020 and early 2021, I tried some Wish-less variants as well, including versions that looked a bit like ANT-hybrids with Solve the Equation or Dark Petition. The mana was much more stable with just 3 colors, but the tutors felt worse than Burning Wish. I did find that I liked having all 4 Doomsday maindeck, but the shells felt great when you drew Doomsday and anemic at bestwhen you didn't.

## The Mindkiller

<row variant="centered">{{!SotV}} {{!EtW}} {{!Mm}} </row>

A few months after brewing the intial Echo Doomsday list, Thassa's Oracle had already cemented its place in the Doomsday Hall of Fame. By this time there were very few people left trying to develop anything other than the 'Meandeck' style lists that are currently among the top tier of the format. That, along with the humorous presentation of [my article about it](https://ddft.wiki/articles/2020/03/21/the-mindkiller/), and of course the four copies of Spoils of the Vault, made the list, which I dubbed Mindkiller Doomsday, not really get taken seriously even by those few people who might otherwise have been interested. I was quite serious about it, however. The deck really impressed me with its high raw power level, and despite the fact that it sometimes caused game losses, Spoils felt insanely strong. The list had a very high rate of combo on turn 1, and Doomsday let it fight through hate that similarly fast combo decks would have struggled with. I got numerous 4-1 leagues with it so it certainly felt like the potential was there, and known combo expert and PSI connoisseur monkeyscantcry eventually took it for a spin and [5-0'd with it](https://www.mtggoldfish.com/deck/3369246#paper). Obviously this isn't a Grand Prix Top 8, but it felt somewhat reassuring. I kept the list updated and continued playing it.

<deck path="2021/07/UpdatedMindkiller.txt" />

Mindkiller is probably the deck I'm most proud of, but it has its flaws. Though it could be suprisingly resilient, it was still a glass cannon, and one that sometimes fell apart without any intervention from the opponent. Every time I had a cold streak with Spoils of the Vault, I would look for alternatives to it. I tried replacing it with Preordain, I tried Plunge into Darkness, I tried Gamble, anything I could think of, but I kept coming back to Spoils. Preordain can't dig 15 cards for 1 mana, Plunge costs 2 and sometimes you overpay life, or could have paid more to find what you wanted. Gamble has some synergry with Echo but often worse odds than Spoils when its just a tutor. Spoils strangely felt like both the glue holding the deck together and the thing keeping it from being really broken. But I felt like the power level was there, or nearly so, and thus the Mindkiller style of DDFT stayed in my mind. 

## The Truly Bizarre

<row variant="centered">{{!Goblin Charbelcher}} {{!Recross the Paths}} {{!Lim-Dul's Vault}}</row>

I've always been drawn to unusual decks, particularly fast combos, although I've been known to play some Pox on occasion. Doomsday itself, back when I started playing it, was one of those unusual decks. Now Doomsday is a normal deck, so naturally I need to make it more exciting (i.e. worse). I've tried too many strange and bad ideas to count, but I thought it might be interesting to see some of my most out-there bad ideas. Each of these I thought had merit for one reason or another, and none of them actually panned out.

<deck path="2021/07/BelcherDoomsday.txt" />

This was a variant of Mindkiller, an ill fated attempt to remove Spoils from the deck. Belcher also gave it another angle of attack, one that couldn't be stopped by Flusterstorm or a well timed Lightning Bolt. The manabase was an issue here. The MDFC lands are critical to good belches, but opening a hand with a bunch of Dark Rituals and 2 lands that don't make black was pretty awkward. Belcher itself was also very mana hungry, more so than anything in the typical Mindkiller list, and so I never really wanted to draw Belcher. Unlike Spoils, which could be a business spell or a ritual as needed, Belcher was only ever the worst business in the deck. I liked that I could fit protection into the maindeck, but losing Echo also made it mulligan much worse. Basically, the tradeoffs it made ended up working out like I thought they might.

<deck path="2021/07/RecrossDoomsday.txt" />

Recross the Paths is Doomsday 5-8! At least, that was the idea. Without lands, it lets you stack your deck for 3 mana, so they're basically the same, right? You can tell by the incomplete sideboard that I didn't get very far with this one. It had many of the same problems that the Belcher list had. Also, it almost always was making pass-the-turn piles with both Doomsday and Recross. I really wanted this idea to work, and had been thinking about it ever since the MDFC lands were spoiled, but it just doesn't. The mana is clunky, the business spells are clunky, and all the important cards in the deck eat into your life total. I'll probably keeping working on this one just because I love Recross, but I don't expect much.

<deck path="2021/07/UB-LDV-DDFT.txt" />

Another list based on the "X is just Doomsday 5-8!" idea. I actually first had this idea shortly after Gitaxian Probe got banned. It wasn't good then, so I probably shouldn't have expected much now, but hey, Oracle had been printed since back then, so why not give it another shot? Lim-Dul's Vault can be used to arrange the top few cards into something that can generate lethal Storm. Play a few Draw4's and multiple copies of Tendrils maindeck so you have a better shot at arranging a lethal pile with LDV. "The deck practically builds itself!" I thought. Too bad it wasn't good. The mana is great since its only 2 colors but that was about the only redeeming quality of the deck in practice.

<deck path="2021/07/PoxDoomsday.txt" />

This one isn't DDFT but it certainly is bizarre. Doomsday costs BBB. Pox makes lots of black mana. Control decks with suprise combo finishes can be good. Maybe this will..nope.


## The Successful Failures

<row variant="centered">{{!ToA}} {{!BS}} {{!IC}}</row>

Some of my experiments that didn't work out still yielded some valuable insights, or pointed me in a direction that ended up being worthwhile. Two that I want to highlight were both spawned from a conversation I had with successful combo brewer Jax. Jax brought up the idea of porting [Meandeck Tendrils](https://articles.starcitygames.com/premium/the-meandeck-tendrils-primer/) from Vintage to Legacy. Since it is a Spoils of the Vault deck, I was immediately interested. We tossed around a couple ideas, I took a couple lists for a spin in the MTGO practice rooms, and it never went much farther than that. Certainly, Stephen Menendian himself considers the deck unplayable and writes as much in his article, and a Legacy port lacks the restricted cards. But I did notice something, which was that after cutting all the banned cards and filling in some gaps with the best replacement cards I could find, I found myself at 52 cards. Just enough for 4 Doomsday, 3 Street Wraith and a Thassa's Oracle... which is how I ended up with a deck in MTGO called "Meandeck Tendrils but it's actually Doomsday". After trying that out for a bit, I ended up fitting Echo of Eons into the deck, and basically ended up with something like Mindkiller but without wishes, just straight UB. Echo improves upon the 1 mana = 1 card = 1 storm principal behind Meandeck Tendrils, by being 3 mana = 7 cards = ~6 storm and often is mana-positive, so it felt like a good fit. 

<deck path="2021/07/MeandeckEchoDoomsdayTendrils.txt" />

Now, this deck wasn't really that good, and the fact that I never finsihed a sideboard for it is somewhat telling. But it got me thinking about the power of Brainstorm, as both a setup spell and a Doomsday enabler. It's also quite good with multiple copies of Tendrils of Agony, since it frequently is worth 2 or 3 Storm; cast spells, Brainstorm, draw 1-2 more castable spells, put back the Tendrils in your hand, then draw into it for lethal was a common play pattern. So I set about making a more stable, less all-in DDFT list with multiple maindeck Tendrils, and ended up on this:

<deck path="2021/07/GrindingStationDDFT.txt" />

This list was a lot closer to a success than a failure. I actually liked it quite a bit. The mana was solid, the maindeck Tendrils felt great against blue decks, and it felt very consistent. The issue was that it was slow. It lacked the early game explosive power provided by Echo of Eons and Burning Wish, and most quick wins invovled either getting lucky with a Draw4, or a quick Doomsday. I found myself beating the decks Mindkiller struggled against and losing to the decks Mindkiller destroyed, but the improvement against blue decks didn't offset the significant step backwards against non-blue decks on average. That said, it gave me plenty to think about. Brainstorm and Doomsday make a great pair, and I liked the power of maindeck Tendrils of Agony, but I needed something that could go a bit faster.

## The Top of the Trashpile

<row variant="centered">{{!SotV}} {{!EtW}} {{!BS}}</row>

So where did I end up after all that? Well, here's the list I think is your best option if you want to win games with DDFT in the present age:

<deck path="2021/07/MindkillerHybrid.txt" />

I can't help but still be a little suprised that a Mindkiller variant seemed to filter to the top of the pile. This one deviates substantially from the original, and from the updated Mindkiller list I presented earlier. I've actually been trying for quite some time to craft a list that split the difference between a typical Echo Doomsday list and Mindkiller Doomsday, but had never quite figured it out. This version finally feels good, and feels like it has good aspects of both. It has explosive power, mulligans well, and the Brainstorms improve the power of Doomsday by opening up a whole new class of pile that wasn;t previously available, as well as give the deck a bit more game past turn 1. Empty the Warrens maindeck has been great for me in general, and it produces play patterns with Brainstorm that are similar to those mentioned previously with Tendrils. Cutting a couple Spoils has slowed the deck a bit and it looks to go to turn 2 more often, but there are other consistency tools now, and a lower risk of losing to Spoils simply by virtue of it being cast less often. The theoretical speed/consistency tradeoff of more lands, less fast mana, and fewer Spoils feels like it increased consistency more than it decreased the speed.

The wishboard has gotten a few new slots over the past year since the original article. Peer into the Abyss is an obvious auto-include; it's totally busted and I have lost precisely 1 game where it resolved. We've also gotten rip apart which is a basically Hull Breach and Chain Lightning combined into one slot. One card that I haven't gotten to test yet but which may find its way into the board is Galvanic Relay. It looks powerful in other storm decks, and while I think its a bit less powerful here because you don't really want to be spending resources on a spell that maybe ends the game next turn rather than ending it right away, but there are situtations it could prove useful so I don't want to discount it. Another upcoming card, Wish, I also expect to test, although I think it will be worse than Burning Wish for this deck most of the time. But we'll see. 

You'll notice there are fewer anti-blue cards in the sideboard, and you can probably guess why. With Brainstorm in the deck, we're less reliant on finding them in the opening hand and can more easily dig to them or sculpt hands that are otherwise resilient to countermagic. The Silences could easily be Xantid Swarm or Veil of Summer depending on what you felt was most appropriate for your expected meta; I like Silence because I feel it hedges best against both blue and combo decks. Fewer anti-blue cards means there were a couple open slots, which I filled in with Abrupt Decay. These have also been great. The most common way the deck lost matches to fair non-blue was by winning the roll and dropping a Chalice of the Void or something to take game 1, and then having another relevant hate card on the play in game 3. Decay gives you an out to these situations that doesn't involve taking a couple turns off and maybe spending your only business spell to wish for Rip Apart. Additionally, it neatly answers hate permanents like Canonist or Hullbreacher out of blue decks that might counter your sideboard solution. 

The manabase looks like absolute hot trash but it seems like it works. It probably is the weakest link in the deck but its tricky to support 5 colors on 12 lands. I took inspiration from 10-year-old TES manabases. One could argue that deck has come a long way since 2010 but those manabases stuck around for a few years after that so they must have been at least functional. This, as well as other factors, make mulliganing with the deck a bit more difficult than with previous versions of Mindkiller. You need to think more about the lands in your hand, what you'll need to cast and the order you'll need to cast them in since not every lands makes every color of mana. You also need to be wary of hands where Brainstorm is your only action. I won't tell you to always mulligan them, but you should think hard about it. Can you afford to mulligan, is going all in on Brainstorm better than a mull, can you clear out the top cards if you whiff, etc. Understanding when a turn 2 combo attempt is better than a turn 1 is another critical skill that will come up more often. Beyond that, most of the skills needed to play the deck are covered in the original Mindkiller article or in the DDFT section of the wiki.

## The End
I urge anyone who made it this far into the article to give this deck a shot. I promise it's better than it looks, and more people playing it means more people to help develop it. While I'm at it, I want to should out some people on the Doomsday discord who have contribted ideas that went into these decks. UnorthodoxBird, BluStalker, nottobay13, and Jens have all been active in playing and developing DDFT, and a few others pop by on occasion. The DDFT Cabal is always recruiting so come on by if any of these lists made your loins tingle.