---
authors: d8dk32
banner: /banners/tendrils-of-agony.scg.jpg
title: DDFT Brews for 2021
---

Like many Legacy players who are dedicated to their deck, I am constantly
iterating, adjusting, and refining my lists. Since I'm a DDFT holdout, I have to
work extra hard to make my deck even moderately playable compared to those more
*normal* Doomsday players. This means I'm very open to trying unsual (read: bad)
ideas in case I find the next piece of sick tech. It's rare that this actually
happens, but even failed brews can leave behind valuable morsels, which may with
luck accumulate into something playable. So, dear reader, let me take you on a
journey through the dark corners of the Doomsday Discord, where suboptimal decks
skitter in the shadows, and the few remaining DDFT players, gaunt and starving,
make their home. We'll see some examples of failures, examine the useful scraps,
and talk about what I think is the best list right now for someone who wants to
play Doomsday and Tendrils of Agony in the same 75.

## The Starting Point

<row variant="centered">{{!DD}} {{!EoE}} {{!BW}}</row>

This is roughly what I and others would consider a typical DDFT list in the
present day. It has undergone some changes since [my original Echo Doomsday
article][articles:echoes-of-the-past] but is more or less recognizable.

[articles:echoes-of-the-past]: /articles/2020/01/01/echoes-of-the-past/

<deck path="2021/07/26/ddft.ubrg.echo.txt" />

<row variant="centered">{{!TO}} {{!IU}} {{!IC}}</row>

The biggest change of course is the adoption of Thassa's Oracle which hadn't
been printed when that article was published. But there are other refinements as
well, most of which are also driven by the printing of Oracle. Street Wraith and
Ideas Unbound instead of the Draw4's (Infernal Contract and Cruel Bargain) are
primarily to facilitate Oracle piles, especially pass-the-turn piles. There's
also a reduced number of rituals and more cantrips for consistency, encouraged
by the reduced reliance on black mana. Clearly, Thassa's Oracle caused a
substantial shift in the Doomsday world, even for those of us trying to Storm
off.

I still think this list is a very reasonable option, and a good place to start
for someone looking to venture over to the DDFT side. That said, there were a
few aspects of it that I didn't like, which drove me to continue iterating. The
biggest was the manabase. Because of the Echoes, discard can't be the only form
of protection. Veil of Summer, or perhaps Silence, seemed to be the best option,
but both necessitate a four color manabase. TES manages this due to Mox Opal,
but our artifact count isn't high enough to support it.

So we're forced to play a slightly sketchy manabase, which makes fetching tricky
and ups the impact of Wastelands and Stifles. Defense grid is perhaps an option,
but in testing I was unimpressed. Too often, it would resolve on turn 2, or turn
3 to dodge Daze, and the opponent could pay 3 to Force a business spell anyway.

<row variant="centered">{{!Solve the Equation}} {{!Dark Petition}}</row>

While these issues weren't catastrophic, and careful fetching could minimize it,
I was nonetheless driven to explore other options. Over the course of 2020 and
early 2021, I tried some Wish-less variants as well, including versions that
looked a bit like ANT-hybrids with {{Solve the Equation}} or {{Dark Petition}}.
The mana was much more stable with just 3 colors, but the tutors felt worse than
{{Burning Wish}}. I did find that I liked having all 4 Doomsday maindeck, but
the shells felt great when you drew Doomsday and anemic at best when you didn't.

## The Mindkiller

<row variant="centered">{{!SotV}} {{!EtW}} {{!Mm}}</row>

A few months after brewing the initial Echo Doomsday list, Thassa's Oracle had
already cemented its place in the Doomsday Hall of Fame. By this time there were
very few people left trying to develop anything other than the
[Meandeck][meandeck:basics] style lists that are currently among the top tier of
the format. That, along with the humorous presentation of [my article about
it][articles:the-mindkiller], and of course the four copies of Spoils of the
Vault, made the list, which I dubbed *Mindkiller Doomsday*, not really get taken
seriously even by those few people who might otherwise have been interested.  
I was quite serious about it, however.

The deck really impressed me with its high raw power level, and despite the fact
that it sometimes caused game losses, Spoils felt insanely strong. The list had
a very high rate of combo on turn 1, and Doomsday let it fight through hate that
similarly fast combo decks would have struggled with. I got numerous 4-1 leagues
with it so it certainly felt like the potential was there, and known combo
expert and PSI connoisseur *monkeyscantcry* eventually took it for a spin and
[5-0'd with it][mtggoldfish:the-mindkiller]. Obviously this isn't a Grand Prix
Top 8, but it felt somewhat reassuring. I kept the list updated and continued
playing it.

[meandeck:basics]: /meandeck/basics/
[articles:the-mindkiller]: /articles/2020/03/21/the-mindkiller/
[mtggoldfish:the-mindkiller]: https://www.mtggoldfish.com/deck/3369246#paper

<deck path="2021/07/26/mindkiller.wubrg.txt" />

*Mindkiller* is probably the deck I'm most proud of, but it has its flaws.
Though it could be suprisingly resilient, it was still a glass cannon, and one
that sometimes fell apart without any intervention from the opponent. Every time
I had a cold streak with Spoils of the Vault, I would look for alternatives to
it.

<row variant="centered">{{!Plunge into Darkness}} {{!Gamble|USG}} {{!SotV}}</row>

I tried replacing it with Preordain, I tried Plunge into Darkness, I tried
Gamble, anything I could think of, but I kept coming back to Spoils. Preordain
can't dig 15 cards for 1 mana, Plunge costs 2 and sometimes you overpay life, or
could have paid more to find what you wanted. Gamble has some synergy with Echo
but often worse odds than Spoils when it's just a tutor.

Spoils strangely felt like both the glue holding the deck together and the thing
keeping it from being really broken. But I felt like the power level was there,
or nearly so, and thus the *Mindkiller* style of DDFT stayed in my mind.

## The Truly Bizarre

<row variant="centered">{{!Goblin Charbelcher|MRD}} {{!Recross the Paths}} {{!Lim-Dul's Vault}}</row>

I've always been drawn to unusual decks, particularly fast combos, although I've
been known to play some Pox on occasion. Doomsday itself, back when I started
playing it, was one of those unusual decks. Now Doomsday is a normal deck, so
naturally I need to make it more exciting (i.e. worse). I've tried too many
strange and bad ideas to count, but I thought it might be interesting to see
some of my most *out-there* bad ideas. Each of these I thought had merit for one
reason or another, and none of them actually panned out.

<deck path="2021/07/26/belcher-doomsday.txt" />

This was a variant of Mindkiller, an ill-fated attempt to remove Spoils from the
deck. Belcher also gave it another angle of attack, one that couldn't be stopped
by {{Flusterstorm}} or a well timed Lightning Bolt. The manabase was an issue
here. The MDFC lands are critical to good belches, but opening a hand with a
bunch of Dark Rituals and 2 lands that don't make black was pretty awkward.

Belcher itself was also very mana hungry, more so than anything in the typical
Mindkiller list, and so I never really wanted to draw Belcher. Unlike Spoils,
which could be a business spell or a ritual as needed, Belcher was only ever the
worst business in the deck. I liked that I could fit protection into the
maindeck, but losing Echo also made it mulligan much worse. Basically, the
tradeoffs it made ended up working out like I thought they might.

<deck path="2021/07/26/recross-doomsday.txt" />

Recross the Paths is Doomsday 5-8!

At least, that was the idea. Without lands, it lets you stack your deck for 3
mana, so they're basically the same, right? You can tell by the incomplete
sideboard that I didn't get very far with this one. It had many of the same
problems that the Belcher list had. Also, it almost always was making
pass-the-turn piles with both Doomsday and Recross. I really wanted this idea to
work, and had been thinking about it ever since the MDFC lands were spoiled, but
it just doesn't. The mana is clunky, the business spells are clunky, and all the
important cards in the deck eat into your life total.

I'll probably keeping working on this one just because I love Recross, but I
don't expect much.

<deck path="2021/07/26/ddft.ub.lim-dul-vault.txt" />

Another list based on the "X is just Doomsday 5-8!" idea. I actually first had
this idea shortly after {{Gitaxian Probe}} got banned. It wasn't good then, so I
probably shouldn't have expected much now, but hey, Oracle had been printed
since back then, so why not give it another shot? {{Lim-Dul's Vault}} can be
used to arrange the top few cards into something that can generate lethal Storm.
Play a few Draw4's and multiple copies of Tendrils maindeck so you have a better
shot at arranging a lethal pile with LDV.

> The deck practically builds itself!

I thought.  
Too bad it wasn't good. The mana is great since its only 2 colors but that was
about the only redeeming quality of the deck in practice.

<deck path="2021/07/26/pox-doomsday.txt" />

This one isn't DDFT but it certainly is bizarre. Doomsday costs {B}{B}{B}. Pox
makes lots of black mana. Control decks with suprise combo finishes can be good.

Maybe this will... nope.

## The Successful Failures

<row variant="centered">{{!ToA}} {{!BS}} {{!IC}}</row>

Some of my experiments that didn't work out still yielded some valuable
insights, or pointed me in a direction that ended up being worthwhile. Two that
I want to highlight were both spawned from a conversation I had with successful
combo brewer *Jax*.

*Jax* brought up the idea of porting [Meandeck Tendrils][scg:meandeck-primer]
from Vintage to Legacy. Since it is a Spoils of the Vault deck, I was
immediately interested. We tossed around a couple ideas, I took a couple lists
for a spin in the MTGO practice rooms, and it never went much farther than that.
Certainly, Stephen Menendian himself considers the deck unplayable and writes as
much in his article, and a Legacy port lacks the restricted cards. But I did
notice something, which was that after cutting all the banned cards and filling
in some gaps with the best replacement cards I could find, I found myself at 52
cards. Just enough for 4 Doomsday, 3 Street Wraith and a Thassa's Oracle...
which is how I ended up with a deck in MTGO called *Meandeck Tendrils but it's
actually Doomsday*.

After trying that out for a bit, I ended up fitting Echo of Eons into the deck,
and basically ended up with something like *Mindkiller* but without wishes, just
straight UB. Echo improves upon the 1 mana = 1 card = 1 storm principle behind
*Meandeck Tendrils*, by being 3 mana = 7 cards = ~6 storm and often is
mana-positive, so it felt like a good fit.

[scg:meandeck-primer]: https://articles.starcitygames.com/premium/the-meandeck-tendrils-primer/

<deck path="2021/07/26/ddft.ub.echo.txt" />

Now, this deck wasn't really that good, and the fact that I never finished a
sideboard for it is somewhat telling. But it got me thinking about the power of
Brainstorm, as both a setup spell and a Doomsday enabler. It's also quite good
with multiple copies of Tendrils of Agony, since it frequently is worth 2 or 3
Storm; cast spells, Brainstorm, draw 1-2 more castable spells, put a Tendrils
from your hand back into your library, then cantrip into it for lethal was a
common play pattern. So I set about making a more stable, less all-in DDFT list
with multiple maindeck Tendrils, and ended up on this:

<deck path="2021/07/26/ddft.ubg.grinding.txt" />

This list was a lot closer to a success than a failure. I actually liked it
quite a bit. The mana was solid, the maindeck Tendrils felt great against blue
decks, and it felt very consistent. Also worth noting is that while the list
presented here has a green splash, you could easily build with any color splash,
or even no splash, it would simply affect your choice of disruption and
sideboard slots.

That all sounds appealing, but the issue with this style of list was that it
felt slow. It lacked the early game explosive power provided by Echo of Eons and
Burning Wish, and most quick wins involved either getting lucky with a Draw4, or
a quick Doomsday. I found myself performing better against the decks to which
*Mindkiller* lost, and losing to the decks *Mindkiller* destroyed, but the
improvement against blue decks wasn't enough to offset what seemed like a step
backwards against non-blue decks on average. That said, it gave me plenty to
think about. Brainstorm and Doomsday make a great pair, and I liked the power of
maindeck Tendrils of Agony, but I needed something that could go a bit faster.

## The Top of the Trashpile

<row variant="centered">{{!Gemstone Mine}} {{!DD}} {{!Silence}}</row>

So where did I end up after all that? Well, here's two lists:

<deck path="2021/07/26/ddft.wubrg.echo.txt" />

<deck path="2021/07/26/ddft.wubr.mindkiller.txt" />

If normal *Echo Doomsday* was a 1 and full-blown *Mindkilller* was a 10, then
the first list is probably a 3 and the second is a 7. I've learned and applied
some lessons from both ends of the DDFT spectrum and thus you'll see some
similarities between the two lists. The most notable is in the manabase, which
probably looks like a burning dog poo, but it usually works out.

For the 5c Echo DDFT list, the mana actually seems more stable in this
configuration. When the most important thing is being able to cast your spells
on time, fetching for basics, or green or white sources, can be a liability. In
the *Mindkiller* variant, the power of Brainstorm both in setup and in piles is
worth contorting the mana a bit to play a handful of fetches.

<row variant="centered">{{!Prismatic Ending}}{{!Endurance}}{{!Dress Down}}</row>

The primary type of disruption is also the same between the two lists now,
although Mindkiller only has access to it after sideboarding. With the printing
of Prismatic Ending, Xantid Swarm and Defense Grid lose too much value to be
worth playing. Discard has lost value over the past year as well, and is already
of questionable worth in an Echo of Eons deck. Tack on Endurance, Stifle,
Mindbreak Trap, Dress Down, etc. and the value of telling your opponent to just
shut up has skyrocketed. With a 5c manabase, Chants are easy enough to support.

<row variant="centered">{{!Peer into the Abyss}}{{!Rip Apart}}{{!Galvanic Relay}}</row>

The sideboards have also acquired some new tools. Since the early days of the
deck there have been a few playable printings which made their way into the
wishboard. Peer into the Abyss is extremely powerful as an alternate engine. Rip
Apart plays the roles that Consign//Oblivion, Hullbreach, or Chain Lightning may
have played, but does so on 1 card. Galvanic Relay has shown promise as an
engine that turns Burning Wish into a must counter, and can function with less
mana than other options.

Finally, the number of Spoils of the Vault warrants some discussion. In 5c Echo
DDFT, the first Spoils is the most powerful. It has application in piles, it can
be used as a simple cantrip if you know the top of your deck, and it functions
as a tutor in a pinch. In *Mindkiller*, Spoils is extremely powerful but you
don't typically want to draw more than 1 per game. Factoring in the risk
involved in casting it, and I settled on 2 copies, although 3 is also
reasonable.

## The End

I urge anyone who made it this far into the article to give this deck a shot. I
promise it's better than it looks, and more people playing it means more people
to help develop it. While I'm at it, I want to should out some people on the
Doomsday discord who have contributed ideas that went into these decks.
UnorthodoxBird, BluStalker, nottobay13, and Jens have all been active in playing
and developing DDFT, and a few others pop by on occasion. The DDFT Cabal is
always recruiting so come on by if any of these lists made your loins tingle.
