---
banner: Scrivener | EXO
title: Decklist Compendium
---

This page serves as a repository of Doomsday decklists past and present.

In the _Historical Decklists_ section are examples of lists from the past. Most
are unplayable due to bannings, while some are still legal but have been
obviated by new printings.

## Current Decklists

The lists can either play a more reactive role and focus on building resources
before going off like the below _Esper Doomsday_ list or be more all in. Since
:card[Thassa's Oracle] is so compact and cheap compared to its predecessor
alternatives, it can still allow for quick wins with an actual long game plan.

::decklist{path=meandeck.ub}
::decklist{path=meandeck.wub}

Pilots like to experiment on a daily basis and keeping lists here simply is not
feasible. Worry not, for newer lists can always be found in our [Discord
server][discord] in the `#decklists-archive` channel.

[discord]: https://discord.gg/vajvFXt

## Historical Decklists

A list from just after the Gitaxian Probe ban, but before Experimental Frenzy.
It looks quite similar to the Echo list, and in fact served as a source of
inspiration to the construction of that list.

::decklist{path=2018/12/ddft}

After the banning of :card[Sensei's Divining Top], the deck changed its shape a
little bit. The number of copies of Lotus Petal was increased to pump up the
speed, since without Top the ability to grind was diminished. :card[Conjurer's
Bauble] saw its first appearance as a _stored draw_ like Top was, and as a way
to loop cards back into Doomsday piles.

::decklist{path=2018/06/ddft}

The classic list, considered by many to be the most playable form of the deck.
It was built to beat the Miracles decks of the day, and the maindeck copies of
:card[Abrupt Decay] and the full playset of Top helped it play a long game and
muscle through :card[Counterbalance]. :card[Shelldock Isle] and Emrakul,
:card[Xantid Swarm], and more decays gave it a strong sideboard plan against the
slow blue decks.

RiP Sensei's Divining Top.

::decklist{path=2017/08/ddft}

This is the earliest Doomsday list I could find. There are some clear
similarities with the classic list but also some weird ANT-like aspects mixed
in. It looks very unrefined, but you can see a lot of the hallmarks of later
Storm decks. An interesting piece of history but not remotely playable, and not
only because of the banned cards.

::decklist{path=2011/08/ddft}
