---
title: Frequently Asked Questions
---

## Table of Contents

## Preamble

Compiled here is a list of frequently asked questions observed from the Discord
or other sources (Twitter, Reddit, video comment threads etc). If you believe a
key question is missing then please feel free to suggest it. A lot of the
questions were also answered in this article:
[DDFAQs](/articles/2020/03/22/ddfaq).

## What are the different Doomsday decks and what is the difference between them?

There are considered, at the time of writing, to be 4 primary distinct variants
of Doomsday available for play. These comprise of **DDFT**, **DDEFT**,
**Doomsday** and **Entombsday**.

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
ToA
EF
FoW
Griselbrand
:::

**DDFT** (Doomsday Fetchland Tendrils) is the closest to historical lists.
Although it adopts the current usage of Thassa's Oracle these decks tend to also
have access to secondary Storm plans using cards like Burning Wish, Echo of Eons
and Tendrils of Agony. They also prefer proactive protection such as Duress over
being able to run reactive countermagic.

**DDEFT** (Doomsday Experimental Frenzy Tendrils) is now an outdated style. This
was the main variant available post Gitaxian Probe ban and pre-printing of
Thassa's Oracle. These lists use Experimental Frenzy as a card advantage engine
and win condition in tandem with Doomsday.

**Doomsday** is the primary deck variant that is having previously unprecedented
success since the printing of Thassa's Oracle. Doomsday uses countermagic like
Force of Will and Daze to play a controlling game before ending the game with
Doomsday. Initially called _Meandeck_ Doomsday, the moniker _Meandeck_ is
explained in this article [here](/articles/2020/03/12/pretty-mean-deck).

**Entombsday** is more of a Tin Fins variant with a main deck plan focussing on
reanimating Griselbrand using either :card[Shallow Grave] or :card[Goryo's
Vengeance] to then have it attack alongside Emrakul, the Eons Torn or, looping
the deck to cast an infinite number of Collective Brutality's or a lethal
Tendrils of Agony. The key point ot focus on is it runs a dedicated
transformational sideboard into effectively a variant of Doomsday.

## What is the _best_ Doomsday archetype? Of that archetype what are the _best_ colours to run?

Doomsday has the most proven results of the archetypes listed above with
performances that outnumbers TCDeck numbers of the previous 10 years preceeding
it for all archetypes (excluding 5-0 publications).

Within Doomsday there is no definitive _best_ colour configuration to run.
Success has been had with straight {U}{B}, {U}{B}{W}, {U}{B}{R}, {U}{B}{G} and
even {U}{B}{R}{G} across the years with most decks having an almost entirely
{U}{B} main deck configuration. The tools that are effective and provided by
each colour depend on the meta at the time and the pilot's preferences in deck
building.

## What list should I start on? What is the _best_ list to play?

If you want a proven and effective updated list, head to the [Doomsday
Discord][discord] server and check out the `#decklists-archive` channel.
Successful lists and placements are posted there regularly to ensure new
technology and strategy are communicated out. There is no defined _best_ list so
just go with the lists that seem to be most prevalent as those are likely to be
considered _best_ at the time.

## Is there a list of common Doomsday piles? What is the most common pile I should learn?

Historically there was a spreadsheet that had an ever-growing list of
pre-prescribed piles based on certain criterias but this was for the old DDFT
decks pre :card[Sensei's Divining Top] ban. A current one is not maintained for
a couple of reasons: the biggest being that trying to rote learn piles is
actually not effective training. It is better to learn the general rule sets or
toolboxes you have at your disposal and then try to build on the fly using your
knowledge, experience and general critical thinking than it is to try and
remember "If I have {B}{B}{B}+{U}{U}{U}+{1}+SW in hand then I can win through
:card[Thalia, Guardian of Thraben] in play".

This Wiki aims to try and provide the general concepts and basic level knowledge
needed to pilot the deck. Select your variant of choice and work through the
chapters under that variant which should provide the simplest pile examples to
give an idea of how to play. The majority of piles become variants of those
discussed but you will, over time, learn to build more situational ones as you
gain experience.

## What is the best matchup for the deck?

Cloudpost.

In the current Legacy meta the best matchups to face are probably Miracles
variants, non-blue decks and TES. These decks often do not provide much pressure
and have limited interaction once Doomsday resolves. We also have a lot of
interaction which means they tend to not have enough disruption to be able to
stop us.

Death and Taxes, Maverick and Post are good examples of the easier matchups with
limited interaction. Still, they can display threats in the form of hatebears
for the 2 formers or larger, game-ending threats for the latter. But often they
are too slow or get answered easily by Daze. For the green matchups,
:card[Endurance] requires preparation and proper sequencing but is far from
being as back-breaking as it is often thought. More details about this in the
[interaction page](/meandeck/interaction#cheating-on-devotion).

TES cannot beat the sheer amount of disruption the deck brings to the table nor
interact with the fast combo kill besides :card[Silence] effects as the Doomsday
pilot unravel their pile. That weakness can be mitigated but often means that
while the TES pilot tries to disrupt our combo turn, they aren't progressing
their own plan as much.

These are likely the most favourable matchups (part based on gut feel and part
based on community-obtained results found [here][data:matchups]).

## What is the worst matchup for the deck?

Delver. Delver. Definitely Delver. Also Death Shadow decks.

Basically any aggressive tempo shell running cheap threats and mana efficient
disruption. UR Delver is the most played deck in Legacy and the deck has a hard
time with that matchup (between 30% and 35% depending on meta shifts and deck
popularity) however Grixis Delver is likely the worst to face as the addition of
Thoughtseize as another angle of disruption makes them very hard to face.

## What is a good meta to play Doomsday in?

Any meta where either Delver isn't prevalent or where decks that prey on Delver
are. Doomsday boasts a good win rate against most of the format including very
positive rates against decks that are favoured against Delver type strategies.
Any format with a large non-blue metashare or very controlling blue meta share
are good fields for Doomsday.

## I think X card might be good, should I run it?

It might be! A lot of people have been working on the deck for a long time and
have very likely tried the card out if considered potentially playable. Feel
free to ask on the Discord but please don't get too defensive if informed that
the card was tried and didn't hit the mark. If you are new to the deck I would
advise getting a few reps under your belt playing it first before delving into
the spicier areas of the card pool. This doesn't mean you shouldn't consider new
things but do check first as likely it has been tried and rejected before.

For a list of _off-meta_ cards which have been tried before and discussion on
them please check out the [playables appendix](/appendices/playables/).

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Drown in the Loch
Baleful Strix
Careful Study
:::

## Is the deck hard to learn? Is it the most difficult deck in Legacy?

The deck is not hard to learn, especially if you have already got familiarity
with the core principles of Legacy. General cantripping principles and the use
of fetchlands are all key skills to learn, no different than many other decks in
the format. The only awkwardness comes from the kill condition itself but even
then it is easy enough to pick up. The deck is far from the most difficult deck
in legacy despite its historic reputation for being as such however it does
feature a high number of decision trees that can be intimidating and, given the
finality of the title card, is pretty unforgiving when it goes wrong. At the end
of the day if you are not enjoying it or it doesn't fit your playstyle then
that's fine! There is no pressure to play this deck to be perceived as _the
smartest type of Legacy player_. Everyone has different ways of thinking and one
person's nightmare deck to pilot (mine would be Maverick) is another person's
bread and butter.

## How do I resolve Doomsday in paper?

A large part of the confusion for the physical resolution of Doomsday stems from
the wording on the original Weatherlight printing of :card[Doomsday]. See the
card below along with the original rules text printed:

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Doomsday|WTH
:::

> Pay half your life, rounded up:  
> Put your graveyard on top of your library, then remove all but five cards of
> your library from the game.  
> Put the rest on top of your library in any order.

With this older templating there are a number of pitfalls that can snag the
unwary who have not read up on the updated Oracle text. First of all the "Pay
half your life, rounded up" is not a cost as is implied by the colon `:` but
actually part of the resolution. You will not lose your life for putting
Doomsday on the stack! Despite what the colon present may imply, the resolution
of the card is _not_ an activated ability. I have had an opponent before who
read my card and asked a nearby judge "Can I name this card with :card[Pithing
Needle]" to which the judge quite correctly replied: "Yes". My opponent then
proceeded to play said :card[Pithing Needle] on the card and was quite put out
that it did not work the way they had hoped it would.

Before the next point let's take a look at the updated Oracle wording on the A25
Doomsday:

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Doomsday|A25
:::

> Search your library and graveyard for five cards and exile the rest.  
> Put the chosen cards on top of your library in any order.  
> You lose half your life, rounded up.

As you can see the wording changes significantly. If you were to perform the
actions specified by the original wording and shuffled your graveyard and
library together you can be called out for a GRV at competitive REL so watch
out. Cards like :card[Shadow of Doubt] will work in preventing you from
searching your library for cards but will still allow you to search your
graveyard. One especially key thing to note is your opponent is allowed to see
what cards you select (if any) from the graveyard as it is an open information
zone. You are not required to explicitly state what you are taking however you
should always allow them time to ask to see what cards are chosen and are not
allowed to hide that information from them.

## How long should I be taking to resolve Doomsday in paper?

If you are at a proper CompREL tournament you should be expected to completely
resolve Doomsday in about 60 seconds (1 minute). This takes into account the
normal decision time required to resolve any tutor and allows for around 2
complete flick throughs of your deck. Any longer and you can expect an opponent
to either ask you to hurry up or to call a judge for slow play. You can help buy
time by pre-building your Doomsday pile in your head during the turns prior by
using the time allowed for decisions like fetching lands or resolving Ponder to
think about what you are likely to build.

When learning the deck, playing with friends or at a local FNM it is likely to
will be given more leeway to resolve it which is great for practice or if you
are unfamiliar with the deck. Often people are very friendly and take some
amount of enjoyment from watching the deck be played but I would still advise
you aim to resolve it in no longer than 2 minutes with the aim to reduce this as
you get familiar with the deck. In this aspect MTGO can promote bad habits as,
thanks to the chess clock, you can often spend a lot of time building and
selecting pile cards as you play and come to rely on this mechanic.

## I run X deck, how do I beat Doomsday?

Haha, nice try! But you won't catch us out that easily! In all seriousness if
you pop into the Discord there are plenty of people who would be happy to
discuss the matchup from the other side of things. We're a friendly bunch and
always open to bouncing ideas around.

## What is the best way to learn Doomsday?

Read the Wiki, watch some content as found on our
[resources](/appendices/resources) page and most important PRACTICE, PRACTICE,
PRACTICE! If you have a spare five minutes try and goldfish the deck. Get used
to the physical manipulations of the cards. Start presenting yourself with
scenarios to beat and try to become as familiar with your decklist as you can.
Doomsday rewards an exact knowledge of your 75 as well as format knowledge
highly so increasing exposure to both is very important. Finally, if you get
stuck, feel free to ask for help! The sense of community is very strong and you
should be able to find someone to answer any queries across most time zones so
please feel free to come and say hello in the [Doomsday Discord][discord].

## What order should I make purchases to build Doomsday?

As with any Legacy deck the focus should always be on the reserved list staples.
dual lands are the first port of call with Underground Seas being the key part.
You should look to pick up at least 2 Underground Seas if not 3 if you can. Once
you have Seas then the Lion's Eye Diamond(s) is the next priority. For Doomsday
you just need one but for the more all-in combo builds you will want 4\. After
that I think you should look to pick up the splash dual lands (if applicable)
prioritising the {U} based ones over any {B} based ones. Once you have your
reserved list staples then the rest of the deck can be reasonably easy to source
with Force of Wills likely being the next biggest purchase.

## I am limited on my budget, can I still build the deck?

This obviously depends on how constricted you are in terms of budget but yes you
can! The easiest way is of course to run a heavy basics list. Unfortunately due
to the life loss from Doomsday _Shock Lands_ like :card[Watery Grave] are not
viable in high numbers. Following this you will only need 1-2 Underground Seas
and can rely on basics and Petals to fix for any splash colours. This can slow
the deck down and make cards like :card[Daze] much worse for early turns but is
perfectly serviceable. You can also omit the :card[Lion's Eye Diamond] in
Doomsday but it will prevent you from getting access to a lot of the more mana
efficient or quick kills it enables. You probably need the Force of Wills but
you can also not run them if need be and instead rely more on soft counters and
discard effects or Veil of Summer. The only card I would really advocate not
skimping on is :card[Cavern of Souls]. This card single-handedly can enable a
lot of wins in {U} matchups and thus is too good a tool to lose.

::decklist{path=meandeck.budget}

Access to :card[Force of Will]:  
-2 Flusterstorm -2 Thoughtseize  
+4 Force of Will

Access to :card[Underground Sea]:  
-1 Watery Grave  
+1 Underground Sea

At 2 :card[Underground Sea], :card[Daze] is unlocked as a reliable option.

## I am seeing lists with two Thassa's Oracles in, what does the 2nd do?

The second Oracle (main or side) can have a number of uses. It helps increase
resilience against effects like :card[Extract] when they are aggressively used,
help give a _second attempt_ vs. cards like :card[Stifle] on the Oracle's
trigger. They can enable additional devotion count, allow blocking in a pinch
with some filtering, provide extra tricks vs. mill effects like :card[Ipnu
Rivulet] and act as a pseudo +2 to your {U} card count for Force of Will
effects. Especially useful if you need to bring in Force of Negations and
maximise the ability to use them.

## Why do some lists run Consider without Deep Analysis?

:card[Consider] was first introduced and one of the aspects that made it an
appealing tool was the fast and low resource piles that could be made with it.

However this was not the key point as to why it was run. It provides a decent
cantrip effect which can be used to gain advantage through cards like
:card[Narset, Parter of Veils] whilst also providing a clean way to _dig_
through two cards in a pile. It also provides a way to create _perfect_
:card[BS] piles [in key scenarios][meandeck:brainstorm-free-cantrip].

[meandeck:brainstorm-free-cantrip]: /meandeck/brainstorm#brainstorm-and-free-cantrip-available

## When do I board in Shelldock Isle and Emrakul?

When people elect to run :card[SI] and :card[Em] they are generally thinking
about fair {U} matchups that do not run :card[Wasteland]. It should not be
brought in versus any Delver variant nor when Wasteland and :card[Teferi, Time
Raveler] are prominant in control variants as both of these can affect it.

In early June 2022, the _Hideway_ mechanic was revamped and while the Isle still
enters tapped, the 3 other cards put back under your deck can no longer be
sorted. For that reason Shelldock Isle has seen a decrease in popularity but the
Emrakul line is still functional.

## What does _Turbo_ Doomsday mean?

_Turbo_ Doomsday is a sub-archetype of Doomsday. It is normally associated with
variants of the deck which have a greater focus on speed rather than resilience.
It is characterised by a higher count of :card[PT] along with greater numbers of
:card[SW] or :card[EoA] compared to other versions.

## What does _Tempo_ Doomsday mean?

_Tempo_ Doomsday is a sub-archetype of Doomsday. It presents a
potential _plan B_ by running both the normal combo and additionally a number of
creature and/or planeswalker based threats. It is characterised by a creature
suite and a lower focus on finding Doomsday or using pile-specific cards like
:card[IU].

## Which is better out of _Turbo_ or _Tempo_ Doomsday?

Against the majority of the meta at the time of writing this _Turbo_ Doomsday
has a more favourable position with _Tempo_ giving up percentage points against
some of the otherwise easier matchups. _Tempo_ however has a much better game to
be played against Delver or other decks that may run a significant amount of
combo-specific hate for the matchup.

---

If you have any questions beyond what is listed here feel free to ask in the
[Discord][discord] or email ddftwiki@gmail.com

[data:matchups]: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/14hIVFCCxK6v6PHzj_7opfigFWVGV73kv59OdeN-J95I/edit#gid=890222427
[discord]: https://discord.gg/vajvFXt
