---
title: The Doomsday Playables
---

## Table of Contents

## Preamble

This is a list of potential Doomsday playables that have been historically tried
and are considered either off-meta, that is to say playable but maybe only
useful in specific circumstances or with certain metagame portions in mind or
are perhaps _too cute_ to run and should probably be omitted from a list unless
you really wish to play them (because everyone should be having fun with their
respective lists!). Each card will have a discussion on how much it has been
tried, its benefits, what it might replace in a common list and any weaknesses
or considerations it may have associated with it.

## Quicken

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Quicken
:::

Quicken is a cantrip effect that can be used to try and help power out your
Doomsday within an opponent's turn or in other tricky situations for your
opponent. Unfortunately the benefit of enabling this, even with a replacement
card draw attached, is not really worth the slot. The deck already boasts a high
density or card filtering, searching and card draw enablers which means Quicken
has to compare itself against both cycling effects from cards like :card[SW] and
cantrips like :card[Pnd], :card[Pre] and :card[Con] all of which are likely the
cards that would be replaced. If you really wanted to have an effect that allows
these instant speed interactions (because who doesn't love casting :card[Tsz] in
an opponent's draw step) then :card[Teferi, Time Raveler] is likely better on
all accounts other than the colour requirement.

## Tutors

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Grim Tutor
Infernal Tutor
Profane Tutor
Scheming Symmetry
Solve the Equation
Wishclaw Talisman
:::

There are many tutor effects available in Legacy however many are considered to
be very archetype-specific. Some of the options presented have significant flaws
or limitations that make them unsuitable for current iterations of Doomsday.
:card[Infernal Tutor] is too reliant on the :card[LED] and works poorly with a
lot of the interaction slots the deck runs like :card[FoW] and :card[Daze].
:card[Scheming Symmetry] provides the opportunity for your opponent to either
find their best piece of interaction or their own enabler to progress their game
plan, especially dangerous if against other fast combo like Oops All Spells or
TES. :card[Grim Tutor] and :card[Solve the Equation] both provide solid tutor
effects but at 3 mana and being sorcery only they are slow. Grim Tutor also has
a life cost which can be costly to the deck.

Of the options above, :card[Wishclaw Talisman] is probably the most effective in
terms of usage however it still suffers from not being as fast as the currently
played alternatives of :card[PT] and :card[LDV] which it would replace and is
open to opposing permanent hate like :card[Abrupt Decay], :card[Collector Ouphe]
and :card[Prismatic Ending]. If you were less concerned with speed and more
concerned about card efficiency and were happy playing a slower game then
Wishclaw or Solve the Equation would be the most viable alternatives. Do note
however that tutoring for Doomsday with the claw prompts you to win the game in
the same turn as the opponent will be able to answer it as soon as they untap.

:card[Profane Tutor] has been experimented with a lot and can be a decent choice
for lists. The card is best utilised on turn 2 which means, in theory, you want
a high number of copies where possible to ensure it is found early on.
Unfortunately, as additional later copies of the card beyond this turn are not
useful, running high numbers of it can lead to a lot of dead draws from the
deck. It also suffers the same issues as some of the other alternatives with
speed being lost from its use.

## Wishes

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Burning Wish
Death Wish
Wish
:::

Wishes are often discussed as a way to increase the number of pseudo copies of
Doomsday within your deck. The most common one discussed is :card[BW] in regards
to its mana efficiency and ability to also find a number of strong _toolbox_
spells. However because of the requirement to add in a significant red splash to
the main deck configuration (given the majority of lists are purely blue-black
without sideboarding) many people look to :card[Death Wish] as a possible
alternative. Unfortunately none of the current _wish_ effects are as efficient
as the _tutor_ equivalents :card[PT] and :card[LDV] in terms of mana cost and
flexibility.

They also generally promote a slower style of play which would tend to omit
tutor effects anyway for potentially additional card advantage engines. If you
were to run them, then they would probably replace any tutor effects in your
deck but are not recommended.

## Striges

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Baleful Strix
Ice-Fang Coatl
:::

Baleful Strix is a great card that can sometimes feel a bit off in a combo
shell. It acts as a multifaceted tool that both helps delay opposing aggression
whilst still cantripping and allowing you to keep a high blue count in your card
pool. When Strix is played it normally replaces some number of cyclers or other
interaction slots because it tends to promote a slower pace of gameplay. Quite
often it is run alongside other tools that synergise with it. Things like
:card[Cabal Therapy], :card[Unearth] or a generally more controlling or
creature-centric build.

## Unearth

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Unearth
:::

Unearth was very popular as the current style of the deck was explored. It
paired well with :card[Predict] which many were running and held its own in a
vacuum thanks to the cycling allowing it to be thrown back if unneeded. These
days it is considered a little too cute as it requires the use of the graveyard
and opens you up to otherwise weak interactions like :card[Surgical Extraction]
or :card[Endurance]. Despite this it's still perfectly playable alongside copies
of Strix or other creature plans and can function as an alternative to a second
Oracle in piles.

## Creatures

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Dragon's Rage Channeler
Uro, Titan of Nature's Wrath
Monastery Mentor
Sedgemoor Witch
Murktide Regent
Triumph of Saint Katherine
:::

There are a lot of creatures which could be added to the list above but these
are the examples picked. The idea in having these creatures is to change the
style of the deck to enable two angles of attack; the conventional one winning
with Doomsday and Oracle and the alternate plan which pressures life total.
Sometimes opponents can overextend with cards like :card[Sylvan Library] or
:card[Ancient Tomb] to find that their life total start mattering all of a
sudden. It also makes them have to consider retaining things like removal in a
situation where maybe they would otherwise prefer to have other types of
disruption.

Sometimes the creature plan is light in the main deck but much heavier after
sideboarding as part of a partial or complete transformational package. There
are definitely ways that you can capitalise on the surprise factor as a result
of it but do be aware, one of the pitfalls in running such a sideboard plan can
be an over-reliance on transforming and a lack of trust or extreme dilution of
the primary plan.

There are ways you can focus more on the creature plan with the early 2022
dubbing of _Tempo Doomsday_ lists but be warned it will skew certain matchups
out of favour and sometimes result in very clunky hands or gameplans with the
wrong parts of both sides being found.

## Multi-Draw Spells

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Predict
Night's Whisper
DA
Reckless Impulse
:::

Traditionally :card[Ideas Unbound] is the _multi-draw_ tool that is used to try
and dig multiple cards into a pile whilst enabling added protection in your
hands or the greatest resource efficiency. Outside of the combo however, the
card is somewhat lackluster and thus many look towards arguably _better_ cards
in a vacuum to take the slot.

:card[Predict] is the most popular of these and has been shown to be perfectly
viable as an alternative with plenty of historical use examples from 2020
onwards. The main positives include synergising really well with the cantrip
shell of the deck and being able to facilitate a longer game. The issues with it
include the fact it only draws 2 cards, not 3, and it both risks a card to the
graveyard and relies on the top of your library in the face of many shuffle
effects like :card[Surgical Extraction] or :card[Boseiju, Who Endures] which can
result in hitting Oracle itself or forcing a turn pass you can't afford.
It's very viable but is likely slightly weaker in a dedicated Doomsday list.

:card[Night's Whisper] is another commonly suggested alternative. It pairs very
strongly with excess {B} mana from ritual effects and is a strong card in its
own right pre-combo. Unfortunately only drawing two cards plus having life loss
after Doomsday resolves can be limiting and costly, especially if having to be
paired with Street Wraith cycles or Force pitch casting. It's a fine card but
normally gets paired alongside Ideas Unbound rather than replacing it.

## Mill Cantrips

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Mental Note
Thought Scour
Consider
:::

Before :card[Consider] arrived on the scene, these were two options for being
able to dig three cards deep into your pile with limited mana. They do have
benefits similar to Consider such as being instant speed and thus allowing to
dig three through :card[Narset, Parter of Veils] or :card[Spirit of the
Labyrinth] however only allowing one card to be drawn means you have to have a
good payoff to get to (something like :card[Unearth] for example having milled
an Oracle) and unlike _Surveil_, (which Consider basically has) there is no
_may_ clause for the mill so if you get hit by a Surgical Extraction for example
you could have your day ruined quite considerably. You also cannot use these
cleanly in the same Brainstorm piles you can use Consider in because they need
to have the single mill clause only to be effective. The cards are fine but
honestly Consider is just better.

## Echo of Eons

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Echo of Eons
:::

Echo of Eons is one of the various _draw 7_ effects that have existed in Magic
and one of the few that are legal in Legacy. It can be a very powerful tool
allowing for some unique pile construction that plays well around Endurance or
makes good use of Lion's Eye Diamond. If you run a list with an excess of Ritual
effects you can ply extra {B} into the _Flashback_ cost for Echo and cards like
Predict or Consider allow you to easily place it into the graveyard.

You have to be wary though as you can deck yourself with the card if you
miscount and forget that it exiles itself. There are also plenty of issues you
could run into such as Hullbreacher that can punish such plays. This fits into
the "probably a singleton for pile purposes but running a second Oracle likely
does the same thing" category of cards.

## Disruption and Removal

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Drown in the Loch
Collective Brutality
:::

These cards can be very powerful allowing for a nice mix of flexibility and
utility whilst being within the deck's core colours. One issue with them
normally stems from the fact that two mana in Legacy is quite a lot and neither
of these options presented are guaranteed to be effective in every matchup. If
you are playing a slower, more controlling variant then they might have space as
a one-of but I would not recommended running them.

The other issue is that trading cards for creatures is often not a good deal for
Doomsday. For hate pieces, or a _Marit Lage_, one of the more common bounce
spells is usually enough.

## Alternative Discard

:::row{variant=CENTERED}
Inquisition of Kozilek
Cabal Therapy
:::

:card[Inquisition of Kozilek] is an interesting card in Legacy. It hits 90% of all
relevant things you want it to without any life loss associated with it. The big
issue, and this can be very relevant, is it does not hit Force of Will. Force is
still the most prevalent piece of {U} interaction you will face and thus you
need to have your own interaction be able to deal with it. Inquisition can be
played but only after you have justified not running the full set of
:card[Duress] or :card[Thoughtseize].

:card[Cabal Therapy] alas has had its hayday and now just doesn't pack the same
punch. These days with so many decks running such a mix of potential
interaction, and without the help of :card[Gitaxian Probe] or sacrificial
creatures to abuse the Flashback with, it is more than likely this card will now
read "look at target opponent's hand and feel remorse over the good ol' days as
your name of _Force of Will_ sees _Pyroblast_, _Dress Down_ and _Force of
Negation_". It can be a useful tool in niche situations involving sacrificing
your own Oracle but unless you are running things like Baleful Strix to truly
squeeze value from it, it just cannot compete these days.
