---
title: Interesting Interactions
---

This appendix describes important card interactions that may not be obvious to a
Doomsday beginner.

## Your Interactions

### {{Act on Impulse}}

Exiling cards doesn't count as drawing, so you cannot lose (or win) by casting
an AoI when 2 cards remain in your library. Cards exiled with Act on Impulse can
be cast, but their activated abilities cannot be used as if they were in your
hand. For example, a Street Wraith cannot be cycled from an Act on Impulse
exile.

### {{Cavern of Souls}}

For Thassa's Oracle this can name Merfolk or Wizard. This will let you cast an
Oracle through Chalice of the Void on X=2.

### {{Conjurer's Bauble}}

Only target a card if you must, never do it just for value, because if the
targeted card is removed from the graveyard by your opponent then the bauble
activation will fizzle and you will not draw a card.

### {{Chromatic Sphere}}

Chromatic Sphere's activated ability is a mana ability. Mana abilities do not go
on the stack, therefore your opponent cannot respond to this activation.
Chromatic Sphere allows you to play around creature removal with Laboratory
Maniac piles because you can play Chromatic Sphere, Laboratory Maniac, and then
activate Chromatic Sphere without your opponent having priority to cast their
removal.

### {{Daze}}

If you have a land drop available. You can use Daze to generate additional mana
by playing a *dead* card like Dark Ritual in order to return an Island to enable
generation of two blue mana.

### {{Lake of the Dead}}

Lake of the Dead does not enter the battlefield until after a swamp is
sacrificed. Therefore, it is not possible to do any tricks like activating it in
response to that trigger. You really do need 2 swamps in play in order to
activate this card, and those swamps will be sacrificed by playing and
activating it. Lake of the Dead's activation is a mana ability and does not go
on the stack either.

### {{Lion's Eye Diamond}}

As in any Storm deck, LED can be cracked in response to draw effects and
cantrips such as Brainstorm, Ponder, Preordain, and Conjurer's Bauble. Holding
priority while casting these cantrips will allow you to crack the LED and
discard your hand but still have the mana as you draw in to the next card of
your library. Failing to announce that you are holding priority will prevent you
to get the LED mana before you draw the cards.

### {{Predict}}

This can target the opponent but can be stopped by Veil of Summer if you use
choose to do so.

### {{Thassa's Oracle}}

Oracle checks the devotion on resolution so if you have cards left in your
library and your opponent kills the Oracle, you will have no devotion and not
win the game. The Oracle checks on an equal to or less than basis so if you have
no devotion and no cards in your library you will still win the game.

### {{Veil of Summer}}

Veil of Summer will prevent any Thought Scour or Predict effects from targeting
you. Conversely, it will not stop Mindbreak Trap, Stifle or Surgical Extraction
from being effective. It will also draw you a card most of the time so be
careful to keep this in mind if you have 0 cards left in your deck. This card
will also let you play cards through a Chalice of the Void.

## Opponent Interactions

### {{Flickerwisp}}

An opponent can cause headaches with an Aether Vial on 3 and a Flickerwisp in
hand, since they are able to exile cards at critical times in your sequencing.
The disruptive cards that Flickerwisp can exile are LED, Conjurer's Bauble,
Chromatic Sphere, Laboratory Maniac, or even a land in response to an unresolved
Rain of Filth on the stack.

### {{Aven Mindcensor}}, {{Shadow of Doubt}}

If there is an Aven Mindcensor on the board, a resolved Doomsday will be able to
search only the top 4 cards of the library and the entire graveyard. Selecting 1
card from the top 4 does not allow you to dig one deeper in to your library.

### {{Pithing Needle}}

Pithing needle cannot stop LED, Lotus Petal, Chromatic Sphere, or Doomsday.

> Players try naming Doomsday due to the strange wording on the Weatherlight
> printing since it appears like activated abilities do.

Pithing needle can stop Conjurer's Bauble, cyclers like Street Wraith and
fetchlands.

### {{Phyrexian Revoker}}

Phyrexian Revoker can stop LED, Lotus Petal, Chromatic Sphere, Conjurer's Bauble
and cyclers like Street Wraith. It cannot hit fetchlands nor Shelldock Isle.

### {{Grindstone}}, {{Predict}}, {{Thought Scour}}, {{Surgical Extraction}}

These cards have the ability to disturb the ordering or contents of your library
at instant speed, when you draw in to your pile.

### {{Portent}}

Can reorder your library at sorcery speed. Interferes with PTT piles.

### {{Show and Tell}}

If against Show and Tell you can build a pile that, if they cast a Show and
Tell, you can cycle and put Oracle into play from it, winning with the trigger.

### {{Stifle}}

Can stop Conjurer's Bauble activations, Tendrils of Agony and Empty the Warrens
Storm triggers, as well as fetchlands, cyclers like Street Wraith and Thassa's
Oracle triggers. Does not stop Chromatic Sphere, Lake of the Dead, Rain of
Filth, Lotus Petal, or LED activations.
