---
authors: d8dk32
banner: /banners/spoils-of-the-vault.mrd.jpg
title: Have No Fear, the Mindkiller is Here
---

*"I must not fear.  
Fear is the mind-killer.  
Fear is the little-death that brings total obliteration.  
I will face my fear.  
I will permit it to pass over me and through me.  
And when it has gone past I will turn the inner eye to see its path.  
Where the fear has gone there will be nothing. Only I will remain."*

One lesson all budding combo players learn as they dive into the world of
degenerate Magic decks is when to *go for it*. When do you take a chance and jam
your combo, despite the possibility of opposing interaction? When do you wait a
little bit longer, trying to find a better opportunity? This is an espceially
critical lesson for Doomsday players, since there is often no recovering if you
choose the wrong time. Fortunately, I have crafted a new take on Doomsday that
makes this decision incredibly easy.

Just always go fo it.

## Mindkiller Doomsday

<deck path="2020/04/mindkiller.txt" />

I'm sure by now you've looked at the decklist, maybe closed it for a second and
looked again, praying it'll be different, like when you peer into the fridge at
4:00am hoping to see something besides the wilted lettuce and week old Thai
curry you saw at 3:30. Perhaps you've uttered deep philosophical questions to
the universe, like *"What the fuck am I looking at?"*

That's a question I can answer.

This is Mindkiller Doomsday, so called because your mind is dead now. I used to
have a job and a family, but then I put :card[Echo of Eons] in my Doomsday deck and
now I'm homeless and casting 3 :card[Spoils of the Vault] in 1 turn. I'm addicted
to yeeting. I'm a braindead yeet-zombie and you will be too if you play this
deck.

Why would you ever play a deck like this? If you have zero control over the
death spiral of your life and have accepted that, then this is probably the deck
for you.

Let's go through it and discuss the dubious deckbuilding decisions I've made...

### Rainbow Manabase

<row variant="centered">{{!GM}} {{!CoB}}</row>

Your mana clearly needs to make {R} and {B}. It also has to make {G}, at least
from the sideboard, though previous iterations of this deck played
:card[Veil of Summer] maindeck. Occasionally you need to make {U}. Creating a
reliable 4-color fetchland manabase on 9-10 lands proved difficult, and rainbow
lands ended up feeling the most reliable. There are a ton of rainbow lands out
there, and they are all worse than :card[Gemstone Mine]. After 4 Gemstone Mine, the
only semi-reasonable ones are :card[City of Brass] / :card[Mana Confluence],
:card[Glimmervoid], and :card[Undiscovered Paradise]. Pick the split you hate the
least, it probably doesn't matter.

### Burning Wish

<row variant="centered">{{!BW}}</row>

This is among the least dubious of all the deckbuilding decisions I made. It's
the glue that holds the deck together, the thread of flesh between a loose tooth
and your gums. Burning Wish has a long and storied history in Legacy Storm
decks, especially the kinds that want to go fast. This is your main business
spell, as it finds wincons and also answers. The sideboard is, apart from a
small anti-blue package, entirely wishboard Ã  la Belcher.

### Echo of Eons

<row variant="centered">{{!EoE}}</row>

Like Burning Wish, this card has proven its power in Belcher, TES and DDFT.
We're a Storm deck playing LED and we want to go fast, there is no reason not to
be playing this card. It's an engine, a combo enabler with Doomsday, and a
potential way to refill your hand if you get disrupted. We're going to ignore
the fact that it also refills your opponent's hand, because they don't matter.

### Doomsday / Thassa's Oracle

<row variant="centered">{{!DD}} {{!TO}}</row>

Doomsday is perhaps a questionable inclusion. Playing it kind of forces you to
play Thassa's Oracle, which is completely dead outside of piles. Winning with it
can be clumsy if you don't have a way to draw into your pile right away. But
Doomsday does have some merits. You'll find it's suprisingly effective at
winning through certain kinds of hate. We'll talk about it more later but it is
a serviceable engine card.

### Infernal Contract

<row variant="centered">{{!IC}}</row>

This is primarily here to facilitate certain Doomsday piles, but it is
functional as a Storm engine of sorts, the way Spanish Inquisition decks use it.

### Manamorphose

<row variant="centered">{{!Mm}}</row>

Manamorphose does a lot. It can help you cast Dark Ritual off a Simian Spirit
Guide, or Doomsday off a Rite of Flame. It digs, draws into Doomsday piles, and
even plays an important role in some piles. It may look like garbage but it is
very important.

### Empty the Warrens

<row variant="centered">{{!EtW}}</row>

Having Empty maindeck provides another business spell, one that is particularly
resilient to countermagic. In the first iterations of the deck, this slot was
taken up by Veil of Summer, and all 4 Empty were in the sideboard. I realized
that I was bringing them in a lot, and that it felt like having them main was
letting me cheese more wins than the Veils were. This is up for debate and
despite my yeet-induced psychosis I could be convinced that this is
meta-dependent.

### Spoils of the Vault

<row variant="centered">{{!SotV}}</row>

Ah yes. Saving the best for last. If Burning Wish was the flesh-bit keeping the
loose tooth in, Spoils is the dental floss your older step-brother used to tie
that tooth to the bathroom door. Spoils is the most powerful tutor legal in
Legacy at this time. One mana, instant speed, and finds anything in your deck.
Spoils plays a dual role as a business spell and mana. It can turn black mana
into another color by finding Lotus Petal. It can function as a ritual by
finding Lion's Eye Diamond. It can find a Wish or an Echo or an LED. It draws
into and through Doomsday piles. It does everything you want and more, with just
one *tiny* downside in that sometimes you cast it, reveal your entire deck and
fucking die.

## How to Have No Fear - Playing Mindkiller Doomsday

As you may have guessed from the Litany Against Fear at the beginning, if you
play this deck you need to be good at convincing yourself that things will work
out in your favor. And if they don't you need to be good at letting it roll off
your back. You are a Warrior, your opponent is a Coward, and Cowards can't block
Warriors.

Before we really dive in though, we need to get something out of the way.
:card[Spoils of the Vault] works 100% of the time. It never kills you. It never
exiles cards you'll need later. It can do no wrong. If you can't trick yourself
into fully believing that, you'll never truly grasp the 200 IQ galaxy brain
plays involved with this deck.

Now that we've gotten past that, let's talk a bit about playing the deck. I
think the best way to do that is to look at some sample hands and think about
how they should play out.

### Hand 1

<row variant="hand">{{!CoB}} {{!GM}} {{!LP}} {{!DR}} {{!CoB}} {{!LED}} {{!EoE}}</row>

This is a pretty straightforward Echo hand. No sense in waiting, just jam the
Echo and hope your new hand does something. The only thing to think about is
what mana you leave floating. I believe the best line is to play out Mine, then
LED, then Petal. Cast Dark Ritual off Mine. Crack the LED for {R}{R}{R}, and use
the Petal to make {U}. That way you can have {R}{R}{B}{B} floating after casting
Echo.

### Hand 2

<row variant="hand"> {{!LP}} {{!LP}} {{!LED}} {{!LED}} {{!EoE}} {{!BW}} {{!GM}}</row>

This is an extremely busted hand, and among the best you can hope for against
Fair Blue decks. You have 2 must-counter spells in hand, meaning you can *go
off* through a Force, and you have plenty of mana so soft counters aren't a
major concern. Play your land, cast your Petals then LEDs. Cast Wish, holding
priority and cracking the LEDs for {U}{U}{U}{R}{R}{R}. If they counter Wish,
just Echo. If they don't, grab Empty the Warrens for 12 goblins. You'll even
have enough mana to still cast Echo afterwards.

### Hand 3

<row variant="hand"> {{!LP}} {{!DR}} {{!LED}} {{!DR}} {{!SotV}} {{!BW}} {{!GM}}</row>

Like the previous hand, this one has 2 business spells and is therefore high
potential against Fair Blue. Play out all your mana. Cast Burning Wish, hold
priority, cast Spoils, continue holding priority, and finally crack LED for
{R}{R}{R}. Now you have 2 business spells on the stack, forcing them to have 2
counterspells. If Spoils resolves, name Empty the Warrens, which is what Wish
would get anyway. If the Wish also resolves, grab Cabal Therapy to shred their
hand. 12 Goblins on T1 should get the job done, and Cabal Therapy will let you
have a chance even against decks that could race the goblins.

### Hand 4

<row variant="hand"> {{!LP}} {{!DR}} {{!DD}} {{!Rite}} {{!SW}} {{!GM}}</row>

The first Doomsday hand. We are pretty clearly casting Dark Ritual into
Doomsday. Street Wraith will draw into the pile and we can have some mana
floating due to Rite of Flame. What's the pile though? Prepare for the most
breathtakingly elegant Doomdsay pile you will ever see:

> SW in hand - {1}{R}, 2 life

<row variant="pile">{{!Mm}} {{!Mm}} {{!Mm}} {{!Mm}} {{!TO}}</row>

Grab some tissues and mop up. This pile right here is extremely powerful. You
can win with very little mana left after Doomsday. It also functions as a pass
the turn pile that wins from just {1}{R}, without the need to include any extra
bad cards other than Oracle. No Predict or Ideas Unbound. No god either. Only M
O R P H O S E.

### Hand 5

<row variant="hand"> {{!LP}} {{!EoE}} {{!DD}} {{!DD}} {{!SotV}} {{!TO}} {{!BW}}</row>

This hand might look like ass but it's fine. This is where you recite the Litany
against Fear. Spoils for LED. Echo. Invoke the higher power of your choice. Dab
on the haters.

### Hand 6

<row variant="hand"> {{!LP}} {{!GM}} {{!Rite}} {{!Mm}} {{!Mm}} {{!CoB}} {{!BW}}</row>

I think this hand is a mulligan, but it's close. You could try to make this a
turn 2 hand. You need more mana to make that Wish useful. On turn 2, you'll have
seen 3 new cards with Manamorphose. If you find a Dark Ritual or an LED, you can
at least make goblins, which is fine on turn 2. But it's high variance, not
guaranteed, and the deck mulligans pretty well. I'd throw this back.

### Hand 7

<row variant="hand"> {{!LP}} {{!DR}} {{!CoB}} {{!LP}} {{!EtW}} {{!BW}} {{!GM}}</row>

This hand isn't stellar, but you should keep it. It can make 8 goblins on T1, or
10 on T2, with protection in the form of Wish as bait. If you decide to make 8
on T1, Wish can later find Cabal Therapy to interact, or Chain Lightning to
remove a blocker, or even Doomsday as a potential a backup plan. The route you
go is going to depend on the matchup. If you don't know the matchup, I'd lean
towards waiting until T2.

## Reality Check - A Bit of Math Regarding Spoils

I doubt you were wondering *"How likely is Spoils to actually kill me?"*,
because you are a Warrior, not a Coward. But maybe you were anyway. Call it
facing your fears. Let's take a quick look at the maths on Spoils.

I computed the average life lost and probability of killing you for a turn 1
Spoils from 20 life (53 cards left in the deck), for a 4-of down to a 1-of. I
used a quick Matlab script to simulate 50,000 Spoils for each.

```
function spoils(deckSize, copiesLeft, numIters)
    avg = 0;
    deathCounter = 0;
    for i=1:numIters
        cardsSeen = 0;
        deck = randperm(deckSize);
        deathFlag = 0;
        while cardsSeen < deckSize
            cardsSeen = cardsSeen + 1;
             if cardsSeen > 20 ;
                deathFlag = 1;
            end
            if deck(cardsSeen) <= copiesLeft;
                avg = avg+cardsSeen;
                %disp(cardsSeen);
                cardsSeen = deckSize+1;
            end
        end
        if deathFlag == 1;
            deathCounter = deathCounter + 1;
        end
    end
    avg = avg/numIters;
    deathPct = (deathCounter/numIters)*100;
    disp(avg);
    disp(deathPct);
end
```

### Results

| Num. Copies | Avg. Lifeloss | % to Die |
| ----------- | ------------- | -------- |
| 4-of        | 10.79         | 14.01%   |
| 3-of        | 13.44         | 23.02%   |
| 2-of        | 17.96         | 38.08%   |
| 1-of        | 26.93         | 62.25%   |

As you can see, you don't really want to be Spoiling for anything less than a
3-of, but even for a 2-of you are still more likely to succeed than to fail. Now
personally I'd take an 85% chance to tutor up the card I need for just 1 black
mana every time. Those are great odds. But over a long tournament?, you're
likely to take some game losses from Spoils. Say you cast Spoils exactly once
per match, always for a 4-of. The chance of uncontrollable game loss over the
course of a 9-rounder is around 75%. Honestly that's better than I was expecting
when I did the math just now, but I can understand why someone like a filthy
Delver player might consider it *unacceptable risk*.

Now where were we? Right, being Warriors.

## Some Dooomsday Piles

This deck is playing some cards that are not in any other Doomsday decks, so we
should address how those cards affect piles. We saw one earlier on, the glorious
Quad-Morphose pile. Lets look at a couple others.

> LED on board - {B}, 3 life

<row variant="pile">{{!SotV}} {{!Mm}} {{!Mm}} {{!Mm}} {{!TO}}</row>

This is a pass-the-turn pile, where you use Spoils to dig down to Oracle. This
lets you potentially win through :card[Mindbreak Trap] or :card[Deafening Silence]. It
is also quite cheap and can get through tax effects as well. If they counter
Spoils, you can still try to use the Morphoses to cast Oracle the next turn, if
you have the ability to cast them.

> Echo, Spoils in hand - {B}{B}{B} + {B}

<row variant="pile">{{!LED}} {{!LP}} {{!LP}} {{!LP}} {{!TO}}</row>

Spoils can be used as simply a cantrip into your pile (in this case a
straightforward Echo pile). If you hit on the top card, you won't lose any life
to Spoils.

> Rite of Flame, Manamorphose in hand - {B}{B}{B} + {1}{B}{R} - 9 Storm

<row variant="pile">{{!IC}} {{!LP}} {{!LED}} {{!LED}} {{!BW}}</row>

Manamorphose can draw into piles as well, and can fix your colors to cast
Contract if you want to win with Storm instead of The Glorious Quad-Morphose
Oracle Pile.

> Spoils, Spoils in hand - {B}{B}{B} + {B}{B}

<row variant="pile">{{!LED}} {{!Mm}} {{!Mm}} {{!Mm}} {{!TO}}</row>

A double-cantrip pile of sorts for when you have a shitload of black mana. You
Spoil for LED, and then either Spoil straight to the Oracle if you have life to
spare, or just draw a Manamorphose if you don't.

## Matchups

When it comes to a deck like this, we don't care so much about precisely what
deck our opponent is playing, but rather what they can do about what we're
doing. Adding this to the fact that we only have 4-5 real sideboard slots leads
me to the conclusion that its better to think in broad categories of matchups
rather than a per-deck basis. As such, we'll go over srategies for each of 4
categories.

### Delver / Daze Decks

Aggro-control and tempo decks, including Delver, Shadow, Infect.

-3 Doomsday, -1 Oracle, -1 Street Wraith  
+4 Xantid Swarm, + 1 Cabal Therapy

Doomsday is uniquely bad against these types of decks so we just cut it
completely. :card[Xantid Swarm] isn't spectacular, but its better than Doomsday.
Therapy comes in as another protective spell. We're unlikely to wish for it,
since Wishes will usually find Empty in these matchups.

### Blue Control Decks

Force of Will decks that don't have a real clock. Miracles, Stryfo Pile, etc. I
would also include something like Food Chain in here. It's not a perfect fit but
your strategy against it is the same.

-1 Doomsday, -2 Simian Spirit Guide, -1 Manamorphose  
+4 Xantid Swarm

Taking out a little bit off everything to fit in the full set of bugs. Doomsday
isn't at its best against blue decks so one gets cut. We're likely to be going a
bit slower against these decks as well, so SSG goes as well. You can get away
with just 3 Morphoses, using a Street Wraith if needed instead for The Glorious
Quad-Morphose Pile.

### Prison-y Decks

Anything with permanents that want to fuck your day up. Stompy variants, Death
and Taxes, Maverick, etc.

No Changes.

Most of the time, you just want to go fast. The best way to win these matchups
is to not give them a chance to play anything. Obviously this will not always be
possible. Doomsday shines in these matchups since you can win through some
prison elements. The Glorious Quad-Morphose Pile can beat a Chalice on 0 or 1,
pass-the-turn piles with Spoils can beat Deafening Silence or
:card[Ethersworn Canonist]. Also keep in mind that these are decks that will often
play :card[Leyline of the Void], meaning Echo can be a liability. But a broken Echo
hand is still probably worth keeping. Maverick could potentially be playing
Veil, so be wary, but not overly so.

### Anything Else

Burn, Dredge, Storm, Depths, Elves, etc.

No Changes.

Just be faster.

## Conclusion

YEET
