---
authors: Doishy
banner: Young Pyromancer
kind: ARTICLE
tags: [LEGACY, MEANDECK]
title: 'Doomsday at the Legacy Pit Open II: An Interview with RoseIsland'
---

## Table of Contents

## Preface

Salutations!

As the nights get darker, the wiki seems to get more active. Almost like it's
not as nice to go outside these days... Oh well! That means more Doomsday
content for everyone!

Just like last year the Legacy Pit hosted their open with a very strong turnout
from players all over the US and Canada. This was hosted the 1st and 2nd of
October and had 306 players pit themselves (pun intended) against each other. Of
course, like last year, there are already reports, reviews and all manner of
quality content flying in from the event so to make sure Doomsday is not missing
out, I have tried to gather so bits from pilots who were representing us there!

I've managed to get 3 written reports and 1 online interview for your
viewing/listening pleasure and am delighted to present them here alongside with
an overall review of the different decklists for Doomsday and their respective
performances.

For the wider meta and to follow the decklists within the event it can all be
found online along with the organiser's website (they produce a lot of good
content so please check them out!):

- [Event MtGMelee Page](https://mtgmelee.com/Tournament/View/11997)
- [The Legacy Pit Website](https://thelegacypit.com)
- [Data analysis courtesy of the Legacy Data collection
  project](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1y9ayA0xGTXENECbDDeFjHRyQz0oWidmIroab3I4Am4s/edit#gid=303790053)

## The Interview with Samantha _RoseIsland_ Murphy

Linked below you can find a link to the interview I (Doishy) had with
RoseIsland. They had the highest placing result of all the Doomsday pilots
represented managing to make it into the top 8 and did so with a novel take on
the more Tempo based approaches that some have been working on, but to a much
smaller scale than that put into more Turbo variants. The interview goes over
the preperation, decklist choices and gameplay across the event as well as
touching on some other topics that are worthwhile having a listen to! Alas it is
only available on Youtube because other platforms require $$$ to host on them.

::youtube{id=hq4p4zUTPnY}

::decklist{path=2022/10/16/tempo.roseisland}

Samantha has also written up a 2 part primer if you are interested in finding
out more about their style of Tempo Doomsday. This can be found on the MinMax
blog:

- [Part
  1](https://minmaxblog.com/embracing-the-dichotomy-a-guide-and-love-letter-to-grixis-tempo-doomsday-part-1/)
- [Part
  2](https://minmaxblog.com/embracing-the-dichotomy-a-guide-and-love-letter-to-grixis-tempo-doomsday-part-2/)

## Reports

Romario once again returns this year to provide us a cheeky little report on how
his event went.

### Romario's Report - 17th Place on UB Turbo Doomsday

[Romario's Twitter](https://twitter.com/romarioneto3)
[Romario's Twitch](https://www.twitch.tv/romariovidal)

Hello, Romario here again with another tournament report, another Pit Open, more
doomsday content from me, I am pretty bad at making notes at tournaments so the
following will be situations I found interesting or moments at the event that
could be relevant for other Doomsday players.

Little bit about the event, the guys from the Pit Open organized one of the
larger legacy events last year towards the end of the pandemic when the
restrictions were beginning to be lifted off and they organized the second
Legacy Pit Open on the weekend of October 1st 2022, the event took place in my
hometown Richmond, VA (super convenient for me lol) at the Greater Richmond
Convention Center, same venue SCG hosted their Opens/Invitationals and WotC
hosted GPs and a couple of PTs in the past.

::decklist{path=2022/10/16/meandeck.romariovidal}

So here is how the event went for me:

#### Round 1 - Logan Powell - N/A

The event was running using the mtgmelee website, about 40min after the
advertised starting time, I got the message for round 1 pairings and to my
surprise my opponent didn't show up, 10 min. Later and I won the round.

> 2-0  
> 1-0

#### Round 2 - Daniel Signorini - Jeskai Delver

Daniel is part of the original Northern Virginia legacy crew who used to play at
the legendary Curio Cavern. I expected Delver and Daniel didn't disappoint
except he was playing Jeskai Delver, G1 I never found a :card[Doomsday] and
lost. G2 I was able to resolve Doomsday and make a PTT pile with perfect
information after a couple of :card[Duress], Daniel did cast a :card[Surgical
Extraction] for extra information and knew I was on the :card[Sheoldred, the
Apocalypse] plan . G3 I resolved a Sheoldred early, my opponent cast 2
:card[Brainstorm]s and the life loss was too much after they got Brainstorm
locked.

> 2-1  
> 2-0

#### Round 3 - Benjamin Chen - Yorion DnT

We sat down and my opponent had a Eternal Weekend Europe eldrazi playmat, I
surely expected to have to fight through some :card[Chalice of the Void] and
:card[Thought-Knot Seer] instead they showed me a Yorion pre-game and cast an
:card[Aether Vial] on turn 1, not a whole lot to report here I resolved Doomsday
early on games 1 and 2 and made some bullet proof PTT piles.

> 2-0  
> 3-0

#### Round 4 - Matt Bessel - Mono White Painter

Me and my opponent made some small talk, rolled two dice to see who would play
first, my opponent then cast a turn 1 :card[Esper Sentinel] off a plains, I
thought for sure it was some DnT variant I was also not happy at all to play
against a turn 1 sentinel, then things got worse when he cast an
:card[Ethersworn Canonist] on t2 and a second canonist on t3, at this point I
knew the game was over but continued to played to see what they were playing.
Turns out on turn 4 they played an :card[Urza's Saga] and a :card[Painter's
Servant], which meant besides the hate bears I would also need to fight through
:card[Grindstone]. G2 and 3 I mulled to hands that could cast Doomsday early and
cast DD on t1 and t2 respectively never giving them a chance to play lock
pieces.

> 2-1  
> 4-0

#### Round 5 - Quang Vu - 8-Cast

This round I believe I was sitting at table 2, Michael Yue who was also playing
vs an 8-Cast opponent was at table 3 and Max Carini at table 4. Spoiler alert we
all won this round!

G1 Opponent cast a turn 1 Chalice but :card[Cabal Ritual] bailed me for a turn 2
DD and a unbeatable PTT pile. G2 I made my land drops and cast Doomsday the good
honest way tapping 3 :card[Underground Sea]s, opponent didn't have neither
countermagic nor pressure on the board so just another PTT pile.

> 2-0  
> 5-0

#### Round 6 - Patrick Humfleet - Naya Depths

This match was featured and can be found in the event archive from the Legacy
Pit twitch channel. [Twitch
VOD](https://www.twitch.tv/videos/1606339586?t=06h11m05s)

> 2-0  
> 6-0

#### Round 7 - Max Carini - Doomsday

Doomsday was going well in the event and we had we knew the mirror match was
going to happen eventually, me and Max sat down do play knowing pretty much each
other's 75, g1 Max cast a :card[PT] tried to resolve a DD which I countered, he
followed up by playing the same sequence again PT-> DD and this time I didn't
have the countermagic but I had my own DD + cycler, all I needed was to draw a
mana source, I drew a cabal rit and comb'd the same turn, I knew Max would win
if I passed the turn and he also had no cards in hand. G2 I suspected I was
going to see an opposition agent and on turn 3 or 4 I cast a duress, Max
responded with an :card[Opposition Agent] I fetched in response, let agent
resolve, discarded then followed up with ritual into Sheoldred, and got a
concession a couple of turns later.

> 2-0  
> 7-0

#### Round 8 - Ryan Mullens - UR Delver

So I knew my last round of the day would be either delver or 8-Cast, it was
delver, very interesting match, interesting situation in g1, I drew DD at
exactly 4 life facing a 3/3 :card[Dragon's Rage Channeller], unfortunately my
hand was :card[DD] + :card[SW], I say unfortunately because at 2 more life I
could safely make a :card[Consider] pile or if the cycler was edge, my
opponent's hand only had a :card[Ledger Shredder], but they also had a
:card[Wasteland] in play, I ended up m aking a pile that lost to that on board
Wasteland when a basic Brainstorm pile would had won. G2 an early Duress allowed
me to resolve a DD with perfect information on t3 and make a win on the same
turn pile, g3 it was a delver game, it flipped and when I cast a duress I saw a
hand with 2 :card[FoW], 2x :card[Murktide Regent], :card[Daze] and a
:card[Pyroblast], and that was the end of day 1.

> 1-2  
> 7-1

#### Round 9 - Bob Huang - 8-Cast

I knew Bob was on 8-Cast and planned accordingly, g1 I cast a t1 DD backed up by
a Daze on my opponent's FoW, just made a PTT with some cyclers and a :card[CoS].
G2 and 3 were pretty similar I cast Sheoldred early but Bob found :card[Karakas]
and I couldn't resolve a Doomsday. G3 on the play I had the option to cast a DD
on t1 with a SW in hand instead I went for Sheoldred, speaking with Michael
_BlackSkyDoc_ Yue between rounds I think going for DD was a much better option
Sheoldred required more resources and wouldn't win the next turn, my reasoning
at the time was that Sheoldred would dodge :card[FoN].

> 1-2  
> 7-2

#### Round 10 - Harry Hacket - Maverick GWr

Another match a saw a green fetch on t1, I don't remember much from g1 but I
believe it was a quick Doomsday, they did have 2 :card[Endurance]s but I made a
pile with 2 :card[TO]s, g2 I had to make a slow pile since they GSZ for a
:card[Collector Ouphe] early in the game, I also kept cavern in the deck which
proved to be a good choice after I saw pyroblast in that game.

> 2-0  
> 8-2

#### Round 11 - Kris Rhinehart - Elves

These last 3 rounds were interesting to say the least, they were all elves, but
not Elves!, they were Newton's creation elves, with :card[Fiend Artisan] and
less elves than the traditional lists. G1 I cast a cantrip my opponent casts a
free :card[Once Upon a Time], they grab an Endurance, the following turn I cast
:card[Thoughtseize], discard Endurance, followed by Dark Ritual + DD, their hand
was all lands, but it had a Boseiju so I made sure to put a land in my PTT pile,
Kris discard Boseiju to destroy my Underground Sea and I searched up the other
one in my deck, they said well played and we went to g2. This time the game went
a bit longer, but Kris played a Fiend Artisan and I knew he was going to tutor
up an Opposition Agent the next, I cast a DD and went for a Brainstorm pile that
wins the same turn but would be soft to Endurance, they didn't have one and I
won.

> 2-0  
> 9-2

#### Round 12 - Matthew Szabo - Elves

This match was in the featured area but it didn't make it on stream, g1 I made
what I thought was a pretty clever play, I cast PT for Doomsday, Matt cast a
Fiend Artisan, next they got an Opposition Agent in play using Artisan, which
normally makes things very difficult for Doomsday since the rogue creature
doesn't let you search your deck and Doomsday is a search effect, but in this
case I had TO in hand, I called a judge to make sure I understood it correctly,
and in fact Doomsday removes deck and graveyard in this boardstate, I cast dark
ritual + DD and played TO with an empty library. G2 I lost to an Endurance and
having my life total pressured, g3 I kept a hand without lands but with 2x
petals, Cabal Ritual and a Doomsday, it would be very hard to make a pile to
play around Endurance and Boseiju, without knowing my opponent's hand I made a
pile to beat Endurance, they had both Endurance and Boseiju.

> 1-2  
> 9-3

#### Round 13 - Jakob Heckert - Elves

This match was also in the featured area but not the whole match since we were
the back up match, kinda similar to the previous round, I won g1 without much
problems with an early Doomsday, g2 lost to Endurance + :card[Natural Order], g3
it was Endurance + :card[Allosaurus Shepherd] with another Elf attacking for 10.

> 1-2  
> 9-4

#### Final Thoughts

Finished in **17th place**, and had a lot of fun playing what is my favorite
combo deck to play, as for sideboard, I basically followed the guide Max Gilmore
posted, changed a few things when facing MUs that weren't on the guide, but as a
rule of thumb, I cut discard and PTs vs decks that play to the board like DnT,
8-Cast and Maverick for cars like :card[CoV] and Opposition Agent; for decks that
could cast problematic permanents I brought Force of Negations. The only card I
would cut for a next event is :card[Mystic Sanctuary], I know the idea was to
have a card for slower games which your opponent doesn't attack your lands, I
didn't play against any of those decks at the Pit Open but in testing on mtgo
the card was not very good, other than that I was very happy with the list.

It was a great weekend, well run event, it was great to see all the other
Doomsday people from the discord and seeing Samantha crush the competition on
her way to top 8, Max finishing in 12th and Michael in 18th.

### BlackSkyDoc's Report - 18th Place on UB Turbo Doomsday

We also have a report from regular grinder on the MTG Paper Legacy circuit
BlackSkyDoc!

::decklist{path=2022/10/16/meandeck.blacksky}

#### Round 1 - Ryan Hayes - 4C Control

G1 on the draw, opp mulls to 6. Opponent leads Island-Forest- while I cantrip
and cast DD on T2 off of DR with a blue fetch still in play. FOW pitching
:card[Narset, Parter of Veils] meets FOW pitching :card[Ponder]. Make the
following pile with a SW in hand.

:::row{variant=PILE}
EoA
TO
CoS
TO
Island
:::

T3 opponent plays a :card[Tropical Island] and passes. T3 draw Edge, pass. T4
oppponent plays :card[Prismatic Vista], passes. T4 draw TO. Cycle SW, play
Cavern and TO. Opponent evokes an Endurance pitching :card[Sylvan Library]. T5
opponent draws and says go. T5 draw TO. Play TO. Opponent plays Endurance
targeting me with DD and SW in the yard. The Endurance trigger resolves, and
they play :card[Swords to Plowshares] on an oracle. I fetch and the TO trigger
resolves with DD and SW in deck.

SB: - Swamp, - SW, - Consider. +2 :card[Mystical Dispute], + Duress

G2 on the draw. I mulligan to 5 after seeing hands with 5 lands and no lands. I
cast a T3 DD which meets a FOW that I can't counter. They cast Surgical
Extraction on the Doomsday. I don't have the heart to go for a Street Wraith
beats win and concede. I noted they played a :card[Volcanic Island] and
:card[Tundra] during the game.

G3 on the play. Keep a banger of a hand. T1 I cast Ponder. T2 I cast Duress
seeing [Island, FOW, FOW, :card[Torpor Orb], :card[Sylvan Library], and
Endurance], taking Torpor Orb. Continue to cast DR and DD with FOW backup for
their FOW. Make the following pile:

:::row{variant=PILE}
IU
SW
TO
PoN
CoS
:::

They play Island and pass. T3 I cast Ideas Unbound, cycle SW, play Cavern and
TO, and pact the Endurance.

> 2-1  
> 1-0

#### Round 2 - Caleb Devany - Naya Depths

G1 &mdash; on the play I mull to 5 and the opponent mulls to 6. An early Duress
sees :card[Knight of the Reliquary], :card[Dryad Arbor], :card[Flagstones of
Trokair], :card[Ramunap Excavator], and some lands (oof). I end up casting
Doomsday on turn three off of three Underground Sea and promptly am hit with
three Wastelands. Knight of the Reliquary beats finish me off before I can draw
enough of the pile.

G2 & 3 &mdash; fairly easy wins. Piles were

:::row{variant=PILE}
Tsz
Island
TO
CoV
CoS
:::

:::row{variant=PILE}
SW
EoA
EoA
TO
CoS
:::

> 2-1  
> 2-0

#### Round 3 - Jon Wood - BR Goblins

G1 &mdash; on the draw. Opponent mulligans to 6, and I mulligan to 5. He leads
with a Cavern of Souls that casts a :card[Skirk Prospector]. He misses land
drops while I cast Doomsday and win.

+1 Chain of Vapor +2 Opposition Agent -2 Daze -1 Duress

G2 &mdash; on the draw. We both keep a full grip. He leads on :card[Goblin
Lackey], which attacks on T2. I flash in an Opposition Agent off Dark Ritual and
the game ends a few turns later after casting Doomsday. Pile was:

:::row{variant=PILE}
EoA
SW
EoA
TO
CoS
:::

> 2-0  
> 3-0

#### Round 4 - Aleksander Tash - UR Delver

This matchup goes according to plan &mdash; cast a discard spell and Doomsday
over the first two turns while having mana up for Daze. The pile in both games
was:

:::row{variant=PILE}
EoA
EoA
TO
CoS
PoN
:::

> 2-0  
> 4-0

#### Round 5 - Joey Funderburk - 8-Cast

Didn't take many notes for this match vs. 8-Cast

Piles were

:::row{variant=PILE}
IU
EoA
TO
CoS
PoN
:::

and

:::row{variant=PILE}
IU
EoA
TO
CoS
LP
:::

Romario and Wonderpreaux were playing next to me and our Doomsday cabal went 6-0
this round!

> 2-0  
> 5-0

#### Round 6 - Samantha Murphy - Tempo Doomsday

Game 1 &mdash; on the draw. Mulligan to 6. An early discard spell sees Murktide,
Daze, :card[Expressive Iteration], Brainstorm, and :card[Polluted Delta]. I take
the Brainstorm and die to an 8/8 Murktide Regent five turns later.

Game 2 &mdash; on the play I mulligan to 6 and have three discard spells,
Doomsday, and two lands! I cast Duress on the first turn, seeing
:card[Badlands], Ponder, Expressive Iteration, Doomsday, Murktide Regent,
Pyroblast and Force of Will. I take Force of Will. They play Badlands. I cast
another discard spell and see another Force of Will, which I discard. They draw
and pass the turn. I cast Doomsday and get forced, then die to Murktide Regent
four turns later.

> 0-2  
> 5-1

#### Round 7 - Harlan Firer - 4C Stoneblade

Harlan and I had played against each other during the team SCG event in
Baltimore the month prior and we both suspected the opponent was on the same
deck. I remembered that he did not have Endurance in the deck, which let me go
for more aggressive piles.

Game 1 &mdash; on the play. A T1 discard spell sees Force of Will, Force of
Will, :card[Ice-Fang Coatl], Brainstorm, :card[Snapcaster Mage], :card[Flooded
Strand], Flooded Strand. I choose Force of Will. On T2 I go for DD with Force
backup and they're unable to Brainstorm into a third force. Since they have no
clock, I go for a double pass-the-turn pile to win.

:::row{variant=PILE}
EoA
SW
EoA
TO
CoS
:::

SB: - Swamp, -3 Daze, - Thassa's Oracle. +2 Flusterstorm, +2 Mystical Dispute,
+1 Duress.

Game 2 &mdash; on the draw T2 cast DD with Force backup. It resolves.

:::row{variant=PILE}
EoA
EoA
TO
CoS
PoN
:::

> 2-0  
> 6-1

#### Round 8 - Jacob Heckert - Elves

Game 1 - Mull to 6 on the play. Opponent leads with a :card[Green Sun's Zenith]
for Dryad Arbor, then plays Allosaurus Shepherd, :card[Gaea's Cradle], and
Collector Ouphe, which keeps me from winning on my third turn. I die on his T3
to a :card[Craterhoof Behemonth]. Ouphe.

SB: -3 duress, +2 Opposition Agent, +1 Chain of Vapor

Game 2 &mdash; Mulligan to 6 on the play. T1 Thoughtseize takes an Endurance and
I resolve Doomsday on turn two. With Thassa's Oracle already in hand, I make a
quad-cycle pile with chain of vapor as insurance and win the next turn.

Game 3 &mdash; Mulligan to 5 on the draw. I keep Doomsday, Lotus Petal,
Brainstorm, fetchland, Brainstorm. He leads with an allosaurus shepherd and
follow up with Collector Ouphe. I end up in a position where I can't do a PTT
pile without dying to a pile of 5/5s and can't win in the same turn due to
Collector Ouphe.

> 1-2  
> 6-2

#### Round 9 - Jeffrey Carr - UR Delver

This matchup goes according to plan &mdash; cast a discard spell and Doomsday
over the first two turns while having mana up for Daze.

Game 1 &mdash; on the play with a full grip!

:::row{variant=PILE}
EoA
EoA
TO
CoS
PoN
:::

Game 2 &mdash; lose after making a pile that relies on a blue cantrip. They
topdeck a REB effect and clock me before I draw again. Should have gone with a
Street Wraith over Ponder.

:::row{variant=PILE}
Pnd
EoA
EoA
TO
CoS
:::

Game 3 &mdash; I mull to 5 on the play, keeping three lands, Edge of Autumn, and
Force of Will. Opponent keeps 7. They play :card[Counterbalance] on T2 and
:card[Maddening Hex] on T3. I cast Doomsday on Turn 4 with a fetchland in play
that resolves!

:::row{variant=PILE}
EoA
EoA
TO
CoS
Underground Sea
:::

They pass twice and I am able to draw both cyclers and go for the perfect kill.

> 2-1  
> 7-2

#### Round 10 - Hunter Nance - UR Delver

The opponent states that he didn't hear me call “odd” during the dice roll
resulting in a re-roll that he won. Weird. End up losing 1-2. Cast Doomsday
twice. In Games 1 and 2 made the following default pile

:::row{variant=PILE}
EoA
EoA
TO
CoS
PoN
:::

In game 3 I resolved Doomsday when my opponent had a revealed Surgical
Extraction in hand and made the following pile with an Island and Swamp in play,
and an Underground Sea in hand.

:::row{variant=PILE}
EoA
EoA
TO
DD
DD
:::

Needless to say, when they cast Surgical Extraction on Doomsday and find, I was
sad and learned that one does not have to take the cards with Surgical. Since
they had Bolt, Bolt, and a shuffle effect, a winning PTT pile would need to
empty the deck without cycling Street Wraith. There aren't any piles with a >25%
chance of winning the next turn, as all of them require drawing multiple cards,
then using LED for mana while cycling into a draw spell.

> 1-2  
> 7-3

#### Round 11 - Harry Hackett - Maverick

Matches were not remarkable.

> 2-0  
> 8-3

#### Round 12 - RoodH - Worldgorger Dragon Combo

Having 8 forces makes this matchup very favored.

> 2-0  
> 9-3

#### Round 13 - Aaron Belsky (Kizma!) - UR Delver

-This match is super tight - I take game 1 off of winning the roll and having
Doomsday plus force on turn two. Game two they have double Bolt to kill me. In
the last game, I have two Underground Sea (one tapped) and a :card[Lotus Petal]
on the battlefield on T2. They have a Delver and tapped Volcanic Island. In hand
I have a Duress, fetchland, Doomsday, Brainstorm, and an Edge of Autumn. I cast
Duress, which gets dazed, and I pay with the Lotus Petal. He reveals a hand of
Brazen Borrower, DRC, Murktide, and two lands! I can't take a card and pass the
turn. He peels a blind Brainstorm that flips the Delver (lucky!). On my turn, I
go for the kill - cast Doomsday, with the intention to make the following pile
to win

:::row{variant=PILE}
BS
LED
Con
EoA
TO
:::

Of course, he casts the Brainstorm here and after putting back two, he casts
Force of Will pitching Brazen Borrower. I am unable to find another Doomsday in
time and lose the match. Congrats to Kizma on his strong finish!

> 1-2  
> 9-4

#### Final Thoughts

Here are my takeaways from the event:

- 2nd Thassa's Oracle &mdash; I made one pile with two Thassa's Oracle all day.
  I never saw a :card[Stifle] or Dress down, and the preferred plan for beating
  Endurance was Pact of Negation (though it is worse than double oracle against
  exactly two cast endurances). I pitched an Oracle to a Force once, but another
  blue card would have worked fine in that situation. I will be putting one
  Thassa's Oracle in my deck for the foreseeable future.

- Ideas Unbound &mdash; I put it in a pile three times and was glad to have it.
  Pairs very well with Pact of Negation to beat Endurance. Would not cut. It
  certainly is weaker against decks with REB effects, but enables very safe
  piles if it resolves. Even if it gets countered, you still can cast a Thassa's
  Oracle with some amount of Pact of Negation / Cavern of Souls if the opponent
  doesn't have a fast enough clock.

- Common piles &mdash; Due to the prevalence of REB effects, the most common
  play pattern was to resolve Doomsday and let the next spell on the stack be an
  uncounterable Thassa's Oracle. Thus, cyclers with Thassa's Oracle, Cavern of
  Souls, and Pact of Negation were the most common pile cards. Casting IU or
  cantrips to dig into a PTT pile after casting Doomsday was a recipe for losing
  to REB. Often times I would discard a opponent's hard counter/Endurance and
  then cast Dark Ritual-Doomsday into a hand with a REB, so post-pile blue
  spells that can be countered were dubious.

- Pact of Negation &mdash; Don't cast it to resolve Doomsday unless you have a
  same-turn kill and are confident that risking it are the best line! I can't
  see cutting the first Pact of Negation, as it is my preferred anti-endurance
  card at present. Is weak to REB if the opponent also has endurance.

### BWand's Report - 276th Place with Esper Doomsday

I just want to make a special comment to say thankyou to BWand for submitting
this despite the less than optimal result. Winning isn't everything and
sometimes the most useful or interesting information can come from losses just
as much! I have a lot of respect for BWand for both providing this and playing
out a full 6 rounds. - Doishy

::decklist{path=2022/10/16/meandeck.bwands}

#### Pre-Event Preperation

Legacy pit II prep: preparing started the event 6 months prior to the event. Not
knowing for sure what to play, researching various tournaments and decks. I knew
delver and GW depths were a large part of the meta, and putting up results in
recent events. Due to the influence of, the infamous Doomsday player, _Emidln_
&mdash; Brandon a good friend and knowledgeable source. I am familiar and a
novice when playing traditional Doomsday, but Esper Doomsday inched its way into
my sights. The play style is similar to my liking, combo player at heart, taking
Omnishow 12-3 back at GP Louisville. And obtained mythic rank in mtg arena the
month prior to build mental fortitude preparing for the long days of magic.
Didn't help I was traveling 2am-3pm, by car to STL, plane to CHI met up with
_Emidln_, to board the plane to Richmond.

Choice of deck/construction theory: Esper Doomsday w/ SFM package. The straight
forward line of Doomsday into :card[Predict] name Thassa's Oracle, mill over
Oracle, draw into Lotus Petal/:card[Unearth]. Unearth Oracle to win. With
alternate creature/equipment of BS/SFM/BSkull/KC. SB consisting of the best
white removal in the format STP and Prismatic Ending, more countermagic in FoN,
interaction, a Plains, and Sheoldred. I wanted to play with Sheoldred, with the
potential of just changing the game in your favor if you resolve, and protect
Sheoldred. Every cantrip the opponent has shocks them . While every draw and
cantrip you play extends the game. Also Sheoldred survives most removal in
legacy because of the relevant 5 toughness. In consideration and deck building,
there were times where instead of the SFM package, 4x MurkTide 2x Sheoldred was
considered for the mainboard.

_Emidln_ wanted me to play UR Delver due to it being tier 0. And that I had
experience with the deck. We played roughly 20 games the night before the
tournament to determine what deck to play. Either UR or EsperDDay. Ultimately, I
chose to play Doomsday.

Event report: 1-5 drop. I wanted to play as much of the deck as possible.

#### Round 1 - Michael Fei on UR Delver

The opponent played tight and hit every answer to my combo. They had Bolt, Bolt,
Delver for the win.

> 1-2  
> 0-1

#### Round 2 - Travis Weeks - UR Delver

The opponent main boarding Counterbalance.

Blind flipping triggers that sealed them the game.

> 0-2  
> 0-2

#### Round 3 - Michael Wood - Helm Combo

Opponent beat me down with the :card[Dauthi Voidwalker] 3/2. I lost game to due
to having no second Oracle in the deck.

> 0-2  
> 0-3

#### Round 4 - Anderson Hunt - Bant Loam

They had just started Legacy a couple months ago. They were playing very well
but could not overcome the countermagic while protecting a Batterskull-equipped
Baleful Strix.

> 2-0  
> 1-3

#### Round 5 - Paul Messplay - UWr Control

My opponent was a better control deck.

> 0-2  
> 1-4

#### Round 6 - William Butler - Maverick

My creature package was short on damage. Took one game with Oracle.

> 1-2  
> 1-5

#### Final Thoughts

Post event thoughts: the event was a good experience,some of my plays were
sloppy needing more playtesting, get more sleep before. As for the deck, I was
wanting Sheoldred and Murktide in the main instead of SFM after the event. I
felt Sheoldred was a powerful card that the opponent had to answer. Murktide
would have been better than the non flyer SFM package. Not to mention works
better with a late game Doomsday.

Tournament was great experience and will be a stop for me in the future.

## Doomsday's Overall Performance

Thank-you again to all those who contributed above!

We'll now go into a quick summary of the decks that were run and the overall
meta and performance of Doomsday at the event.

### Data Discussion

Once again thanks to the lovely efforts of the Legacy Collection Project and the
providing of decklists by The Legacy Pit on mtgmelee, we can look at the
metagame and performance ratings as a whole. To the surprise of no one (except
maybe WotC it seems) UR Delver was the highest represented archetype at 17% and
boasted a powerful 55.17% non mirror match win rate. The fact that 4 UR Delver
decks converted to top 8 shows just how dominant this archetype looks.

Traditionally UR Delver has been the defacto kryptonite for Doomsday lists
however it doesn't look like that put a dampener on the performance of the 8
pilots that took our favourite {B}{B}{B} spell along for the day. Looking at all
archetypes with at least 2 players representing Doomsday boasts the highest win
rate of any archetype at 65.82%! The only two decks that actually were ahead of
it in the event were powerful performances by individual pilots on their
respective decks. That's pretty good one might say!

Many people seem to forget about Doomsday due to the relatively low numbers that
it puts forwards in terms of represenation but this seems to indicate it is one
of the best things to be doing in the format right now. Looking at the other
popular decks represented; GW Depths, 8-Cast, Death and Taxes, Elves, Reanimator
and some Ux Control strategies, we can see many of them are very favourable
matchups for Doomsday. I think it is very well placed and with the right
configuration can easily spike through a large event with ease.

### Lists Discussion

Across the 8 Doomsday lists the event had we saw 1 Grixis Tempo variant, 2 Esper
variants with a more control based focus (1 of which included a maindeck
Stoneforge Mystic package), 1 UB Turbo list with :card[Grief] and 4 UB Turbo
variants without Grief. Of the decks, 3 were running the new Sheoldred as a
sideboard plan, usually alongside other creatures.

Doomsday took a top 8 spot alongside 12th, 17th, 18th places giving an
impressive 50% conversation to the top 32. It was mostly the UB Turbo variants
that did well with the Esper lists not placing quite so highly. It might be that
the loss to speed and the greater focus towards a longer or fairer gameplan was
not as favoured in this metagame however the Grixis Tempo list getting to the
top 8 could disuade this argument. Perhaps the Esper lists lacking both
Expressive Iterarion as guranteed card advantage and Red Blast effects to combat
a lot of what the meta is doing was the primary downfall.

What's really cool to see is that none of the lists played are the same. Every
single one has a number of flex slots or sideboard configuration choices unique
to it and it reinforces just how versatile the archetype is. Breaking down the
numbers the only shared slots consistent across all 8 lists were 4 ofs for
Doomsday, Ponder, Brainstorm, Dark Ritual and Force of Will, 1 ofs for Cavern of
Souls and from there it's a real mixed bag. Most lists favoured 2 Oracles but
some opted for only a singleton. Daze was under-represented which shows the
trend in pilots dropping it often at the moment with only an average of 1.5
copies per list. Force of Negation was the highest represented Sideboard card
with at least 3 copies per list.

Every Doomsday list in the event can be found below:

- [Top 8 - Samantha _RoseIsland_ Murphy - Grixis
  Tempo](https://mtgmelee.com/Decklist/View/247557)
- [12th Place - Max _Wonderpreaux_ Carini - UB Turbo ft.
  Grief](https://mtgmelee.com/Decklist/View/247784)
- [17th Place - Romario _Romariovidal_ Neto - UB Turbo ft.
  Sheoldred](https://mtgmelee.com/Decklist/View/247735)
- [18th Place - Michael _BlackSkyDoc_ Yue - UB
  Turbo](https://mtgmelee.com/Decklist/View/247773)
- [38th Place - Brandon _emidln_ Adams - UB
  ABCD](https://mtgmelee.com/Decklist/View/247988)
- [79th Place - Facuando _ChuckConde_ Conde - Esper ft.
  Dakkon!](https://mtgmelee.com/Decklist/View/247147)
- [106th Place - Brandon Darnell - UB Turbo ft.
  Sheoldred](https://mtgmelee.com/Decklist/View/247785)
- [276th Place - Brett _BWand_ Wands - Esper Tempo ft.
  SFM](https://mtgmelee.com/Decklist/View/247974)

## Final Thoughts

Once again thank you to The Legacy Pit for hosting a wonderful event, thankyou
to our contributors and to all the pilots who chose to represent Doomsday at the
event. It's always cool getting people on to contribute and I look forward to
seeing more contributions from others in the future! If you want to write up an
event report and need somewhere to host it please reach out to us at any time!

Otherwise Good Luck and Have Fun at whatever events are happening near you! xx.
