---
title: Limited Numbers
---

This is a generic title. This section discusses all cards that selectively lock
off a certain CMC cost of a spell. This can include things like
{{Chalice of the Void}}, {{Sanctum Prelate}} or non-permanent hate such as
{{Spell Snare}}. There are some CMCs the deck needs to be able to function, and
some that are completely optional. Here we shall explore the relevancy these
cards have against us and some strategies to face them.

For each value examples will be given on what hate you might face and how to get
around the listed limitation.

In addition to these *work around* piles, we'll also discuss the catch-all
requirements for removing these restrictive permanents. As some numbers being
named restrict certain removal cards, it's good to have at least two available
to allow yourself an out for these cards if you were to face them.

## 0 Mana Cost Spells

In terms of 0 costs spells we have two main ones that are played. Lion's Eye
Diamond and Lotus Petal. Both are incredibly useful mana generating resources
but neither are required to win. All that it means is more mana is needed
post-DD to get us going.

> SW in hand - {B}{B}{B} + {U}{U}{B}{R} - 6 Storm

<row variant="pile">{{!IU}} {{!DR}} {{!DR}} {{!SW}} {{!BW}}</row>

> CB in play, SW in hand - {B}{B}{B} + {X}{B}{B} - 7+ Storm

<row variant="pile">{{!DR}} {{!IC}} {{!DR}} {{!CB}} {{!ToA}}</row>

> 2 SW in hand - {B}{B}{B} + {B}{R}{R} - 6 Storm

<row variant="pile">{{!DR}} {{!AoI}} {{!DR}} {{!DR}} {{!BW}}</row>

> 2 SW in hand - {B}{B}{B} + {U}{B}{R}

<row variant="pile">{{!DR}} {{!AoI}} {{!DR}} {{!LM}} {{!SW}}</row>

These piles have lost a lot of their power with the banning of Gitaxian Probe
since the free draw effect utilized here does not count towards Storm count.

The general concept to remember is that our main method of fast mana generation
after our 0 cost artifacts is DR. This means we need both {B} to enable the
casting of these rituals and also {R} available to cast BW at the end.
Alternatively if you are aiming for a LM pile you need {U}. As all our cantrips
are not affected we can still easily draw into what we need. If you happen to be
playing with maindeck ToA then you don't need to worry about these additional
colour requirements but for most DDFT lists you do.

CMC 0 basically only stops Engineered Explosives in terms of cards we can bring
in to fight it. Anything else such as {{By Force}}, {{Hurkyl's Recall}} or
similar can all deal with a Chalice on 0 with no issue and similarly,
{{Massacre}}, {{Abrupt Decay}} and {{Pyroclasm}} can all easily deal with
Sanctum Prelate. One thing to note is, should you by some means have a way to
generate colourless mana, you can in fact play EE for {1} and it will resolve
with 0 counter on due to the nature of Sunburst only counting coloured mana.

## 1 Mana Cost Spells

This is THE classic opener of Stompy variants, Aggro Loam and other strategies
that aren't concerned with cantripping or similar. The main issue with this
limitation is getting to the point you can cast Doomsday rather than the actual
going off. Obviously things like running BW along with artifact hate such as
{{Meltdown}} can help get around the issue but you may just find you can go off
without it (however unlikely that may be). You can also just try to go for an
{{EtW}} play by throwing cantrips into Chalice then using lands, LP and LEDs to
BW for EtW. This can also achieve a natural ToA kill if you have the time and
resources.

The two main points to take is the lack of ability to cast your cantrips and the
lack of being able to cast things like DR or CB. IC is the preferred draw method
here as it means you get the complete stack rather than IU that leaves you
needing to draw an additional card. If you have a CB in play already then there
is obviously no issue but it is still worth considering. This is also where the
cycling ability of Street Wraith and {{Edge of Autumn}} shines as it represents
a cantrip that, although does not generate Storm, does allow drawing into the
pile and also drawing a card for LM victories.

With these piles you also have to consider you have most likely cast DD off of
lands and LPs. As a result you probably have less mana available and as the most
common method of entering into our stacks are one mana cantrips, pass-the-turn
piles are a strong consideration. If passing the turn is not an option then
wishing for a draw spell, using a draw spell already in hand or using something
like Edge of Autumn to access the pile are all considerations.

> Pass the turn - {2}{B}{B}{B}{R} - 7 Storm

<row variant="pile">{{!BW}} {{!LED}} {{!LED}} {{!LP}} {{!BW}}</row>

> BW in hand, CB in play, pass the turn - {1}{R} - 8 Storm

<row variant="pile">{{!LED}} {{!LED}} {{!LED}} {{!LED}} {{!BW}}</row>

> BW in hand, CB in play - {B}{B}{B} + {2}{R} - 8 Storm

<row variant="pile">{{!LED}} {{!LED}} {{!LP}} {{!LP}} {{!BW}}</row>

> BW in hand, CB in play - {B}{B}{B} + {1}{R} - 7 Storm

<row variant="pile">{{!LED}} {{!AoI}} {{!LED}} {{!LED}} {{!BW}}</row>

In terms of removal there is very little here. Only {{Chain of Vapor}} and
{{Void Snare}} are affected here. This is where By Force shines over some other
artifact removal as casting By Force with X = 1 means that it becomes a CMC 2
card that then allows you to destroy a single Chalice set to 1. A Sanctum
Prelate is equally vulnerable as most of our removal for creatures costs 2 or 4.

## 2 Mana Cost Spells

This is less likely to be faced in terms of Chalice of the Void but significant
in that it includes playing around Spell Snare, a semi common card in many Ux
decks. The main things that get cut from this is IU and BW. Ideally this means
if you are running a draw-3 option you should have no issues generating a simple
double cantrip LM pile however if you require a BW Storm kill then you have to
get rid of it. You can also ignore this limitation with maindeck ToA.

> SW in hand, CB in play - {B}{B}{B} + {X} - 8+ Storm

<row variant="pile">{{!LED}} {{!AoI}} {{!ToA}} {{!LED}} {{!CB}}</row>

> SW in hand - {B}{B}{B} + {2}{U}{R}

<row variant="pile">{{!AoI}} {{!LED}} {{!BS}} {{!LM}} {{!Abandon Hope}}</row>

This limitation in terms of removal is very awkward. Things like Abrupt Decay
are not affected from a Chalice set to 2. This does lock off things like
Hurkyl's Recall or Echoing Truth though but allows Void Snare and Chain of Vapor
to be used. What is harder to remove is a Sanctum prelate set on 2. This
prevents BW from finding a Massacre and prevents the casting of Abrupt Decay or
things like Pyroclasm.

## 3 Mana Cost Spells

This is an interesting one to deal with. At this point it is almost guaranteed
this is a Sanctum Prelate rather than a Chalice as very rarely do decks dump six
mana into stopping 3 cost spells. Especially as such decks normally run plenty
themselves. The main cards blocked here are of course Doomsday itself, and some
of our enablers (AoI, TW and IC). If you are running IU then this does not
prevent your main PTT piles should this limit come down once you have committed.
If facing this limit you still have access to everything you need to find
answers and if in doubt, you can still initiate an Empty the Warrens line with
no issue.

Removal-wise this does not prevent anything really unless you are going for
something more spicy such as {{Toxic Deluge}} or {{Rushing River}}. Otherwise
all your removal is turned on and ready to go.

## 4 Mana Cost Spells

In this category we introduce, in addition to Prelate and Chalice, {{Gaddock
Teeg}} as another limitation permanent we could face. The main thing here is
that this number block prevents our Storm finishers from being used. LM piles
are completely unaffected so those are an easy line to victory.

Also to consider is the fact that we don't need to worry too much about Chalice
being set to four. Storm will still trigger so only the original instance of the
spell will be stopped. You do have to mindful that this does not trip you up. It
does still prevent the use of Massacre though in case it should be needed.

Removing these two is also tricky at this cost block as it turns off our primary
removal in the form of Massacre. Other means of removal, if a LM pile is not
available, need to be considered.

Teeg also shuts off the use of By Force in the instance that he is used in
tandem with Chalice or similar (think Aggro Loam) so this could advocate the use
of other removal. He also shuts off the use of Engineered Explosives.

## Limitation Removal in Your Piles

Although we have touched on some examples of playing around these limitations
and also the relative effectiveness of certain removal cards, we haven't
discussed simply incorporating these cards into piles to allow us to win.
Obviously certain limitations will prevent you getting to these piles in the
first place but these should still give you an idea of how to swap out pile
elements for the required removal. For ease of clarity I shall present the use
of {{Nature's Claim}} for it's unique mana cost of {G} which you can swap out
for the appropriate removal spell by substituting the mana cost accordingly.

> SW and BW in hand - {B}{B}{B} + {2}{R}{G} - 8 Storm

<row variant="pile">{{!LED}} {{!Nature's Claim|WWK}} {{!DR}} {{!LP}} {{!ToA}}</row>

> BW and BS in hand, CB in play - {B}{B}{B} + {U}{G} - 9 Storm

<row variant="pile">{{!Nature's Claim|WWK}} {{!AoI}} {{!LED}} {{!LED}} {{!LED}}</row>

> SW and BW in hand - {B}{B}{B} + {2}{R}{G} - 7 Storm

<row variant="pile">{{!LED}} {{!Nature's Claim|WWK}} {{!LED}} {{!SW}} {{!ToA}}</row>

> Pass the turn, SW in hand - {2}{U}{U}{G}

<row variant="pile">{{!Nature's Claim|WWK}} {{!IU}} {{!LP}} {{!SW}} {{!LM}}</row>

> Pass the turn, SW in hand - {1}{U}{U}{G}

<row variant="pile">{{!Nature's Claim|WWK}} {{!TW}} {{!LED}} {{!SW}} {{!LM}}</row>

> Pass the turn, SW in hand - {2}{R}{G}

<row variant="pile">{{!Nature's Claim|WWK}} {{!AoI}} {{!LED}} {{!SW}} {{!LM}}</row>

> Pass the turn, LED in play - {2}{G}

<row variant="pile">{{!SW}} {{!IU}} {{!Nature's Claim|WWK}} {{!SW}} {{!LM}}</row>

> Pass the turn, LED in play - {2}{U}{G}

<row variant="pile">{{!SW}} {{!AoI}} {{!Nature's Claim|WWK}} {{!SW}} {{!LM}}</row>

## Pass-the-Turn Piles Using Chain of Vapor

One somewhat unique piece of potential removal for anything not set to
preventing 1 CMC spells being cast is Chain of Vapor. This allows you to bounce
your own 0 cost artifacts to further increase Storm count before using it to
remove a limitation.

> Pass the turn, SW in hand - {U}{U}{U} - 9 Storm

<row variant="pile">{{!IU}} {{!LED}} {{!LED}} {{!CoV}} {{!BW}}</row>

> Pass the turn, LED in play - {U}{U}{U} - 8 Storm

<row variant="pile">{{!IU}} {{!LED}} {{!SW}} {{!CoV}} {{!BW}}</row>

> Pass the turn, BW, SW and any 1 card in hand - {U}{U} - 9 Storm

<row variant="pile">{{!SW}} {{!BS}} {{!LED}} {{!LED}} {{!CoV}}</row>

## Removal Choices

With so many sets having seen print, there is now a veritable plethora of
different removal options for getting rid of things like
{{Chalice of the Void}}, {{Trinisphere}} and {{Thorn of Amethyst}} with many
being able to get rid of multiple at the same time. See the [removal
tables][removal-tables] for more details.

## Summary

1. There is often a winning line available despite facing hate
2. Strong sideboarding is key to mitigating these issues
3. Variable CMCs for your removal is advised to some extent

[removal-tables]: /appendices/removal-tables/
